now this is an interesting you know
Insight that that we we can take back to
ancient times but St Thomas aquinus in
1265 writes his Suma theologica this
seminal text of Western philosophy you
know forget the just the theology just
Western philosophy and in it he talks
about this very interesting thing he
says that that man mankind humankind
we'd say today has four Idols you pursue
everybody pursues one or more of four
idols and he calls them the substitutes
for God because his supposition is that
that we all want God but God is
extremely inconvenient a lot of
one-sided conversations and a ton of
rules so we look for substitutes that
have kind of these Divine
characteristics the problem is they're
180 degrees off God they are money power
pleasure and fame fame he says honor
which is has different connotations you
have a son who's a marine who serves
With Honor that's not what we mean we're
talking about admiration Envy uh of
other people of you which is which is
people want that or or just Prestige or
maybe Fame you know some people actually
want to be famous but let's just call it
money power pleasure and fame everybody
you know I play this game what's my idol
and I'll ask people not what's your
actual Idol but what is not your idol
you know of these four money power
pleasure Fame what's the one that least
attracts you that you could get rid of
with total impunity you don't care and
then we'll we'll start eliminating and
we're going to find your idol is the
whole thing now the interesting thing
about that is that what he says
is not that you'll go to hell if you do
that he says you'll be unhappy if you
don't recognize the idol if you don't
recognize the idols in your life the
trouble is the lyic system of your brain
Mother Nature that Tyrant tells you that
you'll actually be happy if you get your
idol and so you chase it and you chase
it you can't quite figure out what
you're going to do if you get it like
Tom's going to get you know hundreds of
millions or billions of dollars what are
you going to do with that money that you
would actually like and you can't quite
figure out well yeah because if you if
you articulate it you know if I say
you'll buy a yacht and you're like I
don't that sounds like kind of a hassle
to have a yacht maybe it sounds good but
not that good right the real reason you
want that is because you want admiration
because you want the the validation of
what it represents of you to you you
want to this transference of social
comparison you've always done with other
people you want to actually feel the
thing that you felt for others about
yourself that's what the idol do that's
the nasty Switcheroo that's the that's
the despotism of this of of of mistaking
the intrinsic good for the
instrumentality that's why Thomas
aquinus was so astute in what he was
talking about here so when we play this
game and we we we see what is actually
holding us back and you experience this
absolutely you were chasing the thing
chasing the thing and chasing thing
getting more and more and more miserable
because you're actually getting closer
and closer to your idol and realizing it
will not realize one single thing that
you needed for your own happiness it had
no intrinsic worth look there's the
thing about money by the way the
research on money is very clear that it
doesn't actually ever bring happiness it
lowers unhappiness which are processed
in different hemispheres of the of the
brain happiness and unhappiness are not
opposites they're not they're different
experiences and what happens is that low
levels money will lower unhappiness so
when I could finally go to the dentist I
felt better the trouble is I don't know
how to do the sums inside my brain I
just knew I felt better and we always
mistake lower unhappiness for higher
happiness and so early on you're like
wow I went from from you know $115,000
to $20,000 a year and I felt better I
actually felt better about myself I was
able to to eliminate some of these
sources of of you know misery so I'm
happier and so you get into the pattern
early on you wire your brain when you're
a young person working your way up the
ladder more money feel better that means
more happiness and you realize that
going from $250 to $300,000 is not doing
it that because it's not big enough jump
apparently so you go and you go and you
go and you go and you go and you're
basically just chasing a lure that's
what you experienced and that's why
you're were miserable right because you
couldn't get there from here it's
interesting yes I put different words to
it and I'm curious to see what you think
about this so I think about it from an
evolutionary standpoint so we have
directives in our brain that there is
going to be a sense of disease if you
don't do certain things I think that
deep and profound unhappiness can come
from pursuing the wrong thing so that
you're spending your time doing things
that just they rob you of energy instead
of giving you energy but I also think
that people end up profoundly unhappy by
not doing things that nature wants them
to do right and I think one of the
things that nature wants us to do and so
just not doing it will be a problem is
work really hard to turn your potential
into skill set yeah and so if things
come easily to you even though you're on
top of the world and everybody else
admires you and wants to be you that
there will be a sense of disease for you
because you're not working hard it
doesn't feel meritorious yeah Nature has
to find a proxy right so nature wants
you to have children so it makes sure
that sex is intensely pleasurable but
that's really just a proxy for have kids
so that I find really interesting that
that nature is working in these weird
proxies so people end up like you think
you're supposed to do one thing chase
money power Fame whatever you're like
why does this suck but all of those
things actually do have utility and so
the thing with money is people are
always going to pursue it the thing with
Fame is people are always going to
pursue it why because it actually has
utility so money for instance is more
powerful than people think not less but
it isn't what you've been told so it's
never what myself and everyone else
included is trying to do is feel better
about themselves right it won't help
with that it cannot touch your
self-esteem and that's like the biggest
like mind [__] ever wife won't love you
more your children won't respect you
more when you have more money exactly
and more troubling you won't respect you
more yes which is ultimately the cuz
other people will like people treat me
differently because I have some micro
Fame and because it's actually troubling
too because when you know somebody's
instrumentalizing you when you know
somebody's objectifying you because of
this outside characteristic it makes you
profoundly uncomfortable it's
interesting people hate that you know
it's the one thing where we will allow
people to Rectify us you're welln you're
successful and people will be nice to
you because of that and deep down you
know that they they they don't love you
and it's not how it plays out in my head
how does it play out in your head that I
have no ability to be vulnerable around
them oh I see for sure but that's the
same part of self that's the same part
of objectification you and and if when
you're objectified you can't be a full
person there's another interesting thing
that might actually apply you're a
creative you're fundamentally a creative
when you were doing your work you were
thrown off the creative process now why
is creativity intensely pleasurable you
get you've read the work of mikai chent
Mii the great social psychologist who
wrote a book a very famous book called
flow f l w flow and what it talks about
is how minutes how hours turn to minutes
of sheer pleasure when you're in this
Flow State when you're doing something
that you can Master you you can it's not
too easy it it requires your ability but
you can Master it because of your skill
and you can get into this groove
creatives must create if creatives are
not creating they will be miserable
because they can't attain a flow State
it's very possible Tom that when you
were in this part of your career you
needed to create what you wanted to quit
and go to Greece to do creation you were
basically craving that it's like you had
no protein in your diet for a year or
something it's like I don't know I just
can't stop thinking about peanut butter
well cuz you were create you were you
were you were craving this macronutrient
in your psyche and and you were never
getting a flow State and if you're
denied the flow state that uniquely
comes to you through creativity you're
going to you're going to be practically
suicidal yeah it was it was definitely a
rough period that's interesting I've
never thought about it as being
intrinsically a reflection of the
pleasurability of flow but you might be
right it's just I feel I feel alive that
is the right word I feel alive when I'm
creating I never happier than what I'm
creating it's amazing people who are
fundamentally creatives look same thing
you know when I retired as a CEO and I
came back to writing speaking and
teaching um I'm a new man I'm a new man
for the past 3 years it's extraordinary
you said something a while ago I didn't
want to interrupt you but I want to go
back to it now you said you rediscovered
yourself yeah what does that mean like
you need a sense of identity is that a
core part of this like is when you say
you rediscovered is it a self-narrative
it's you you know who you deeply are as
a person you're acquainted with yourself
you're acquainted with your true self
and just as with people who are around
you you can you can create a an identity
that's actually not authentic you can
create an identity to yourself that's
not authentic you can be giving yourself
a self narrative that's not true to
actually who you are as a person what
does it mean who you are what you're
good at what you love it generally
speaking has to do with being in the
zone of what you actually love to do and
what you appreciate most in your life
when you're in line with your own values
when you're living Accord with your own
value so Yung would have put it this way
Carl Jung his definition of his
understanding of Happiness was that you
need to understand your own values what
you value what you think is proper and
correct and moral and if you know what
that is and can articulate it and live
according to that you will be happy if
you do you agree with that I think it's
actually there's a lot of Truth to that
because you know you have to figure out
what you think what your model of the
world actually is what you think truth
is and then living in accord with your
own values with your own Integrity is is
really critically important because when
people live outside that Groove they're
they're never in equilibrium they're
just never the problem is that they're
not comfortable they're not comfortable
in their own skin and I've noticed this
you know I was working you know was it
was it was it was good being the
president of with Think Tank I was lucky
to be president of Think Tank I believed
in the work
but it wasn't who I was and so I was
kind of out of my groove for 10 years 10
and a half years and when I started
going when I went back to writing and
speaking and teaching and doing creative
work I
said is that always who you were or was
that because you switched into Crystal
it's always I was always a C you know as
a kid I was painting and writing and
composing music and I just always wanted
to be I was creativity is the most
important thing in my life or curiosity
and creativity are the are the most
important thing that I can not the most
important thing in my life the most
important thing that I can do and when
I'm actually happiest and when I was
managing a large Workforce managing a
lot of creatives to their best selves I
mean it was they had certainly creative
moments to it to be sure but it wasn't
comfortable to me and when I my second
curve which was much more crystallized
intelligence is a lot also a lot more
creative so I was kind of out of
equilibrium for a long time during that
period as well which compounds the
problem of my declining fluid
intelligence also not being in a
creative role but it's just so much
better I mean I I teach you at a great
University which I love I write for a
magazine every week about things that
I'm really interested in I get to talk
to you about it this is well beats
working so true for some reason I was
just thinking today like I was pacing
listening to you and I was like I'm
technically working right now weird I
was like this is cool it is super cool
and you know there are people that I've
met it's interesting you know I talk to
lawyers who don't feel like they're
working I talked to and a guy who's
putting in cabinets in my house and and
he's super into putting in cabinets he
loves making cabinets he was talking
about all the details and he's so proud
of his work and I say do you do you do
do you like your work and he said it
doesn't feel like work you know I went
on a fishing Expedition deep sea fishing
Expedition with my son Carlos we we he
loves to fish we go fishing and uh and
the guy says every morning I wake up and
he says today I'm going
fishing and so this is what we all need
to find I mean we need to each person
because we have a the blessing of living
in an economy where you can do a lot of
different things um the problem is that
people Chase these extrinsic lures the
money power pleasure and fame and they
get out of the groove of what they're
supposed to do and then they wonder why
they're unhappy I want to go back to
Yung and this idea of values so as you
were saying it I was like yes part of me
agrees but then as I run the thought
experiment sort of check it against
other things um other people to see if
it holds up I feel like right now we're
living through maybe a weird moment or
maybe a completely normal moment in time
where people are using their values to
cudel each other yeah and it doesn't
when I look at them it makes me deeply
uncomfortable and does not
resonate with how I think about values
so is this just a bastardization of the
word value or do the people that that on
either side of the aisle that are just
viciously going after each other right
do they really believe what they're
saying because it seems like a super
dark energy yeah so so this is a
variation on the theme they're that
these These are people's True Values but
in a fear equilibrium where we're
culturally in a polarity of fear fear
and love are are cognitive and
philosophical opposites so fear is the
master emotion it occupies a part of the
lyic system called the amydala it
actually uses more brain tissue than any
other basic emotion because it's what
keeps you alive if it were not for fear
you would have been you know your
lineage would have died out hundreds of
thousands of years ago by being eaten by
a saber 2 tiger which weirdly you were
not afraid of and so so fear is really
important love is the opposite of fear
love will actually neutralize
inappropriate fear or excessive fear
fear will I did not see those opposites
coming yeah because we think of of love
and hatred but hatred is Downstream from
Fear hatred is always a byproduct of
fear Downstream from Fear so what
happens is I love the way you say that
like Ultra profound [__] like yeah
obviously I never thought of that before
and so and so when when when people come
to me and they have too much fear the
prescription is surround it with more
love Sur neutralize it with greater
amounts of love it's pH and it's it's
alkaline an assd if you on the other
hand if you're looking for more love and
you don't have enough love in your life
I'm going to ask you questions about
what you're afraid of because I'm going
to try to work on your fear God damn
yeah and so this is and this is how we
actually deal with if you have a fear
problem I'm going to work on the love
Dimension if you have a love problem I'm
going to work on the fear Dimension okay
so now when all the way this all this
comes together ultimate in in our lives
is we have to figure out what the
problem is and what we have in our
society today is a fear polarity in our
politics and our ideology and our
culture and what that the way that
manifests in our values is we don't use
our values which are beautiful and good
as a gift we use them as a weapon now
think how counter uh uh effective that
is how how how destructive that actually
is but when you're in a fear polarity
you're actually through fear you're
going to use your own values
antagonistically toward other people
which is incredibly uh ineffective
you're using coercion instead of
persuasion the point of values and
sharing your values is to persuade each
other that's the fruit of the
Enlightenment but it's also just you
know the basis of human nature if you
cudle other people with your with your
with your values and use them as a
weapon there's z% chance you're going to
convince anybody of anything but you're
trying to use force zero so the problem
that we have is we could move from a
fear to a love polarity then people
would go back to using their values as a
gift we might we will disagree we will
disagree but disagreement is beautiful
it's the competition of ideas which is
fundamental to a free Society
you and your wife there are things
you'll never agree on and you will die
married and in love that's a you can
live in permanent harmony with somebody
with whom you
disagree but only if you have a love
polarity in your life and you use your
values which are in contrast to the
other person's values as a gift and not
as a weapon what we see today in
politics on campuses in media is that
people are trying to kill each other
with their values you know you're a
traitor well you're a racist I mean the
things that people are throwing at each
other is basically never going to
convince anybody of anything because
there's too much fear damn so what are
people afraid
of people are
afraid we we go through these these sort
of sine waves of these cultural
polarities a lot
and emotional contagion is a very
profound thing facts yeah and so
emotional contagion is one in which it's
uh the the culture actually starts to
become in so when when I was a kid for
example growing up in the Pacific
Northwest um in the 1970s there was deep
fear of serial killers Cults remember a
fear-based polarity of of cult and and
what that that led to was
unbelievable um bitterness in politics
where left and right just as bad as
today or almost as bad as it is today um
between the Democrats and the
Republicans between the conservatives
and the Liberals and it all came from
the fear that had infected you know from
in the in the aftermath of Vietnam and
you know the the culture wars that were
going on and the and the this the the
Cold War these were very it was a very
fear-based Society on the basis of this
there was a break in that but then you
know it comes back again is the whole
thing the the the opportunity for us as
social entrepreneurs the opportunity for
us is to is to change the polarity is to
encourage people to live by love to have
the courage of actually living by love
in a fear culture and and that's you
know you can fire people up with that
it's what does it mean how do you do
that you basically to make people commit
to only using their values as as a gift
to being around people who are different
than they are to listen to different
points of view to go to people that with
whom they would ordinarily not be in
communion and say I want you to know I
love you to say those incredibly
transgressive words this is the most
transgressive message in all of human
history is love your enemies pray for
those who persecute you that's the
gospel of St Matthew that changed life
on Earth actually is to say that led to
that concept led to the Western
Enlightenment which basically said we
don't have to use Force we can actually
live by
persuasion that was a profound
difference in the in the culture that
led to the progress that would create an
economy where Tom can become a
successful entrepreneur quite frankly
one thing leads to another but we're in
regress right now the fear polarity in
our culture is leading us we we're
devolving culturally because of this so
if we really want a better world I mean
I know I sound like a just like an
unrepentant hippie of which I've been
credibly
accused that we need we need love we
need to stand up to the people on our
own side whatever that side is and say I
refuse to hate I'm just I'm just not
going to do it I'm I'm done man I'm done
I love
you it's interesting so I can't
articulate it that
cogently because I probably haven't
spent as much time thinking about it as
you but I've come to a similar
conclusion so what I've been saying so I
never thought that I would ever utter a
word that had anything to do with the
culture war and then I started to really
get freaked out by watching people run
in opposite directions like just
seemingly as fast as I can CU you're not
super political right I'm not political
in the slightest I don't find politics
interesting it seems to encourage people
to be divisive right and so my thing is
to your earlier point about you can be
married to somebody and love them deeply
and passionately and disagree about
things so in business as is true in
marriage if you both think alike one of
you is not necessary and the I heard the
same thing about so when when you really
ask why are there two parties which I'd
never stopped to contemplate that so Ray
alio says there are only so many human
personalities and that's why history
repeats over and over and over I thought
ah it's really interesting yeah that
there are only so many personality types
and that there are basically two big
buckets that you can break people into
people that are we'll call Compassion
dominant and people who are
conscientious dominant so not that
they're exclusively either but people
who are like you can't leave anybody
behind and then people over here are
like you have to be responsible for
yourself right so it's the sort of the
liberal conservative dichotomy that we
often think about popularly exactly and
so that cool all make sense and then in
business I watched this play out so I
had two partners previously
and there were times where they didn't
see eye to eye and I remember the
contribution I felt most strongly that I
had brought to the dynamic was I'm on
the outside going you're both
extraordinary so value each other for
being different like value that friction
right and that in the friction lies the
magic and that either one of you would
be a problem on your own but when you
have that counterveiling force it
actually creates something really
incredible but only if you respect the
other person's View and so then I
started going okay politically it's the
same thing whether you're conservative
or liberal it's like you have to respect
the friction you have to understand that
either one if we only had one spirals
into madness and it is only in the
friction I won't even say the balance
it's in the friction between the two
that you sharpen your ideas spoken like
a great entrepreneur look the the
proverb Proverbs say that iron sharpens
iron I was giving it talk to the
assembled members of the Republican
party on the house and the Senate side
the members of the House the members of
the Senate all Republicans at a retreat
some years ago and I said I asked how
many of you wish we lived in a one-
party State no hands and no Hearts let's
be honest I said how many of you are
grateful that we live in a democracy
that has multiple parties or at least
two every hand goes up I said you just
told me you're grateful for the
Democratic party axiomatically I wasn't
trying to be tricky but it's actually
true if you're grateful that you can
that there that we live in a country
where we can actually have disagreement
without a knock in the night in the Jack
booted Thug You Are by aent by
construction grateful for the people who
disagree with you look the the Yankees
are grateful for the Red Sox they don't
want to blow up the Red Sox bus on the
way to the game that's not how
competition Works competition requires
collaboration it requires rules it
requires respect you know I like the Red
Sox more than the Yankees but I want the
Yankees to show up with their best
pitching and beat them fair and
square I don't want them to Forfeit
that's actually there's no good in that
there's no good in that whatsoever and
remembering this is really really
critical you know the whole idea that
we're in right now and this is how the
fear-based polarity breaks down the iron
sharpens iron how it breaks down the
whole idea of competition it basically
says that do whatever you have to
because you know War I mean you know
scratch out the eyes you know a knee to
the groin I don't actually care what
happens in politics because
the biggest threat to this country is my
neighbor who votes for the other party
that is simple Insanity that not to
mention the fact that that is factually
incorrect you know it's actually
possible that Vladimir Putin is going to
bring this country back together again
it's actually possible that somebody
who's you're people are you know looking
at like oh that's
non-democratic that's what that thing
means it's actually not the Democrats
right it's something else and that's one
of the reasons by the way that that
threat brings people together that a
common enemy actually brings people
together the great the the the greatest
pity that I can imagine is that the
coronavirus epidemic didn't make us love
each other more a minute though didn't
it feel like it was going to it sure did
it sure did except that we politicized
that because of the deep fear in our
country and the fact that we have
leaders that are encouraging us to kill
each other rhetorically that are
encouraging us for their own the outrage
industrial complex in media and politics
is trying to drive us apart the outrage
industrial complex I like that it's an
old play Eisenhower's
military industrial complex but the
outrage industrial complex remember you
know everybody's watching us now when
you hate somebody's profiting and not
you bottom line well said yeah no man
that's exactly how it feels yeah and
it's crazy and it's interesting so I'm
definitely not an unrepentant hippie or
credibly accused uh of being hippie I'm
super weirded out by that stuff but the
only thing I can think is that we have
to race to the middle and love each
other like that's it and love has been
or even in the middle even just like
stay in stay in the SIDS and still love
each other it's like keep your opinions
absolutely you know I want I'm not
saying get rid of your opinions yeah
yeah but I me is the party that's
closest to the middle always gets
elected n it's not necessarily the case
I mean we've been kind of oscillating
back and forth between between political
positions that are actually not
representative of the middle and this is
a different kind of sort of a a it's a
different political Dynamic which you're
kind of going rail to rail and you're
going rail to rail because you know you
basically cuz you can have flashing into
the rail on each for example you can say
that you know given the fact that we we
go between parties might mean because
people are so close to the center or it
might be because you have two blocks
that are incredibly strong that are
relatively equal in power but very very
different than one another so this is
the key the key is basically either one
can be fine you can have very I mean I
was had dinner with a couple an older
couple a couple of weeks ago and the the
the wife is super liberal like
pro-choice and the Democrats all the way
and the husband is just he's just as
rightwing as they get I mean just very
pro-life on abortion I mean all these
issues that down the line what you'd
expect from conservatives and liberals
and they're they've been they've been
married for 50 years and they and it's
like and in privately says gosh I admire
her so much she's just so wonderful in
the whole thing and and it reminded me
that this is the key thing that you can
be in permanent disagreement but in love
equilibrium we just have to be people
that can do that you know we've been
convinced somehow by people who are
making money and getting power and
followers and their jollies from our
fighting that we have to that we that we
can't be around people disagree with us
yeah that's Insanity that's a that's a
that's quite frankly a mistake and you
know and you would not be a successful
entrepreneur if that had been the case
where everybody has to agree because as
you quite astutely point out um you know
if you surround yourself with people
just like you you're not going to
succeed I love the idea of Lincoln's A
Team of Rivals exactly right getting
people that think differently getting
people that will push you like in in
business I will just tell you right now
if you don't have people that are
willing to tell you when you're wrong
you are [__] at least so I going back
to my own insecurities I don't see
myself as smart enough to just run the
company by decree so I've had to create
a structure where people are not afraid
to speak to powert and because I have
not invested anything in my self-esteem
around being right I don't mind like hey
just tell me where I'm wrong I'm so like
obsessed with getting the result I don't
care if it's my idea I just need it to
be the right idea but man it's really
hard to get people in in a company
Dynamic where ultimately there is an
imbalance of power and of course I can
fire them at any second but they could
leave at any second which is equally
distressing for me except multiplied
they only have you know two people my
wife and I who co-founded the company to
worry about we have all 50 of them uh
you know to worry about so and if you're
a tyrant and they leave you're cooked
yeah no doubt yeah because it's hard to
find good people people and the secret
to success actually is a good team it
actually is good people it's interesting
I do this test for my students I teach
this class called leadership and
happiness at the Harvard Business School
and I I take them through a battery of
personality and happiness tests over the
course of the semester and the one they
like best is the positive affect
negative affect battery and what that is
is is your positive and negative affect
emotion levels and what they learn is
that you can be both very positive and
negative you can be a high happiness and
a high unhappiness person because you're
a high affect person and you can also be
a low unhappiness person but a low
expression of Happiness person you're a
low affect person you can be high
positive low negative that's the
cheerleader you can be low positive and
high negative that's the poet low low is
the judge and high high is you he's the
mad scientist right and what you need
and what I show is actually you know
using the you know the research on this
that you got to figure out which one you
are and you must surround round yourself
with what you're not the biggest
predictor of success on teams and
entrepreneurial startups or even
established companies is making sure
that the CEO is not surrounding herself
or himself with people who have the same
affect profile and there's a role for
everybody there's a role for The Poets
there's a role for the judges it
interesting it's a guy who I it was
actually a woman in my class this year
and she's like I don't know if I can be
a successful business leader she's a
doctor um and she's getting her MBA
super high super striver super striver
she says I don't know you know if I
could I've got this judge profile you
know this low low aect profile I don't I
don't know I said what' you do for a
living before this she say that was a
surgeon I said that's perfect I do not
want a high AFF effect surgeon you know
somebody who opens me up and says oh my
God and so there's a role for everybody
and we actually need that iron
sharpening iron on our teams and we need
to Value it we need to love it we need
to actually resist the tendency to want
to surround ourselves with people like
us and this is exactly what we're not
doing in our politics and our country is
in Decline as a result just today
literally I was asked by an online coach
if they needed to build their own app in
order to launch their business and I
told them do not build something if it
already exists kajabi has all the tools
you need to reach all of your Revenue
goals with their allinone platform it's
easy to turn your skills passions and
experiences into online courses
membership sites podcasts communities
coaching and more and you get to keep
100% of your Revenue because everything
is owned and controlled by you kajabi
also has robust analytics easy payment
options email marketing tools and
customizable website templates all built
in and right now kajabi is offering a
free 30-day trial to start your business
if you go to kajabi.com
impact Theory just go to kajabi.com
impact Theory and join the creators and
entrepreneurs who have made over $6
billion I also think we need to have a
healthy distrust of ourselves you're not
going to like those words but I am
skeptical enough of myself meaning that
I know I'm high high that I can get very
excited about something I know that
emotions make dots feel like they
connect that don't actually connect and
so it's like I have to make sure that I
seek that disconfirming evidence that I
don't think well I feel it and therefore
we all need to get behind this idea I'm
like no no no I tell people put on your
cynical hat like tell me where's the
problem yeah I completely agree with
that and you know you had Adam Grant on
the show no Adam teaches it at Wharton
at you know at pen as social
psychologist fantastic his newest book
was called think again which is exactly
the case that you're making he makes the
case that if you really want to be
successful don't trust you and it
doesn't mean that you can never trust
you but you know look for the the
evidence to the contrary look for ways
that where your confirmation bias is
probably leading you astray don't look
to feel good about yourself cuz you were
right on everything look you're wrong on
lots of stuff you just don't know on
what stuff yeah so help have people
around you who can and it's probably not
that fun to have somebody around you who
every single day says you're wrong in
every single thing you got to find some
sort of a balance for Pete's sake and if
you're the boss you're probably right on
most things but do if you're if you're
wrong you should want to know first not
last if you want to be successful yeah
it's crazy to me how and I won't say
it's crazy I understand it when you are
right it feels good even now when I know
better it still feels good when I was
right I just don't invest in that I
don't encourage that in myself I'm like
yo you've got to be careful with that
yeah but when people would actually
rather like they get angry when people
point out a flaw in the idea I'm like
what are you doing like that you are
headed towards an iceberg and you're
actively discouraging people from
letting you know yeah it's ego threat
ego threat is really deep for people who
are living their heads because they
don't want people to think they're
incompetent the failure's real totally
the failure's coming no no but they will
they'll they'll resist tooth and nail
it's just it's like you're trying to cut
off my finger by telling me my opinion
was wrong it's unbelievable how the
evolution has led us to this place you
want to be right you want to be right
because you feel like an almost physical
need to be right being contradicted um
is is socially painful and there's a um
the same part of the brain the anterior
singul of the brain processes both
physical social pain that's crazy we
have a very practical brain a very
parsimonious brain and you know
stimulating the same part of the brain
so it's like you know being being told
you're wrong and being embarrassed for
something that you were wrong feels like
somebody punching you in the face to
your brain at least and so you'll resist
that because you're trying to protect
yourself it's deeply suboptimal and
dangerous you're right yeah if I could
just in fact my success is because I'm
not afraid to be embarrassed I never
like it it sucks every time but a
willingness to be embarrassed rest is
how I have learned yeah know and
humility of course is a great is one of
the great secrets of Happiness too
that's interesting why yeah humility is
in is because it gives you peace
humility allows you to relax because
you're not trying to protect something
yeah you're not actually trying to
protect your fortune you're not standing
in front of your stash of gold all the
time you know walking back and forth
with a shotgun you know you you could
basically just walk away and take it you
know you can you can relax into the
reality of your fallibility for for once
and a lot of people never quite and I'm
sure that people are listening to our
words right now and some people are
going like actually I think that might
be true you know I've never actually let
down my guard you know and once you
actually get into it's it's actually
it's a very interesting rhetorical habit
when you're having a conversation with
your spouse or your friend or your anyl
interlocutor of any kind and they make a
good point say
huh that's a really good point I think I
might be wrong I think I'm I think I
might be wrong now really hard to do
secret to marriage though it is oh man
God if you can do that it's amazing it
is amazing now part of the problem is
that you often don't think you're
wrong that is part of the problem yeah
and so you know being consiliary in a
way that that you know saying I think
I'm wrong when you actually aren't or or
or where truth is you just don't know
you just don't know I mean a lot of
marital Discord comes because you know
somebody's saying you got to do
something differently and you literally
don't know what to do you don't know
what to do I mean there were probably
times when you were miserable well I'm
just going to guess in your work and you
were going a you were working 80 100
hours a week and you're going in a
million different directions and your
wife say you need to be happy you need
to let this go you need to do less and
you're like I don't know what to do less
I I don't know how to do less and that's
really tough because that's giving you
directions that you can't quite take and
a lot of marital Discord actually comes
down to that is directions you don't
know how to follow I'm really obsessed
with this idea that running in the back
of your mind are evolutionary algorithms
and there's no escaping them and so
there are just certain things you are
going to have to do if you want
to I don't know if you're going to agree
with this framing but if you if you're
going to feel the way you want to feel
you must be aware of these algorithms
you must acknowledge them right so I've
always tried to migrate people away from
happiness not as you define it as the
smell of the turkey stop worrying
about right exactly because they're so
transient correct and get to fulfillment
correct and fulfillment for me has a
formula be interested to see if you
agree with this um these are based on
what I consider the evolutionary
algorithms running in your mind that
there is no escape from so you are going
to have to work hard anything that comes
easily will just not it won't resonate
that's a satisfaction issue by the way
satisfaction is the joy that comes after
struggle that's what satisfaction is so
you get satisfaction always have to come
from struggle you have to do something
something and it's the sense of earning
something so for example if if you you
cheat on the exam and you get an A
there's no satisfaction true but I feel
deeply satisfied after good sex do I
feel like I earned it I don't know I
have not investigated this feeling yeah
but that's that's actually that's that's
not satisfaction that's enjoyment is it
that's what you and satisfaction you
don't feel sexually satisfied well
that's a word that we use but it's
different than what we're talking about
here so it's again we're defining the
term which I think is important super
important because you may be about to
have me separate two ideas that because
I don't have words for I don't people
talk about sexual satisfaction where
they're talking about sexual enjoyment
so enjoyment is a better word for you're
done so when I am overcome with desire
the right way to think of it for me is
hunger it feels the same I've got to
have this thing I really want it
anticipatory chemicals oh my God and
then I get it and so like I'll
differentiate between masturbation and
sex when I masturbate I don't
necessarily feel satisfied that's one of
the things that makes that such a
whatever Pursuit whereas when I have sex
I feel satisfied like there's some
deeper thing in me and and it it it is
an extinguishing of The Hunger but
because I have oxytocin and vasopressin
it's like oh man I feel so good so it's
this combination of the calming of that
like seeking Behavior with like and I
feel so bonded and connected to this
person yeah this is just terms so the
way to think about it in in this
particular framework is pleasure versus
enjoyment got it okay so pleasure is you
know something that pornography is
associated with pleasure um sexual
activity in a and a in a parab bonded
relationship is is is is associated with
enjoyment because it has people and
memory and so one of the things to keep
in mind a strategy especially for a lot
of young people a lot of young men is to
is to do is if you like something
it's best if you're not doing it alone
because then you're probably inop it not
necessarily this is just kind of a rule
of thumb this is not this is not an iron
law but it's a rule of thumb doing it
alone is associated with pleasure so you
know um anheiser Bush doesn't do ads
about beer where they show a dude
pounding a 12pack alone in his apartment
right why not because that would be that
would be yeah because a lot of people
use alcohol for pleasure right which
leads to addiction and misery they T
they you know you and me cracking open a
Bud Light and clink and talking about
how great it is and because we're
friends and we're making a memory and
that's enjoyment which is associated
with happiness so we have a we have a
basic idea of that the same thing is
true with the the example of sex that
you talked about a minute ago you can it
can be pleasure or it can be enjoyment
and everybody knows the difference
between sexual experiences that are
pleasurable or enjoyable enjoy enjoyment
is the goal because that's one of the
macronutrients of Happiness we talk
about in term in the terms that you
define about satisfaction but it's
really a in in this terminology and
again you know you have to just defining
terms these are just words but the
concepts underlying them are are are
critical in the book you give a really
good example of pleasure without
enjoyment yeah uh which you mentioned
obliquely a minute ago but when you
think of a drug addict yeah they're
doing the drug right they're
theoretically getting the pleasure but
they're not getting any of the enjoyment
right they're getting tons of pleasure
it's because they're loading only on
pleasure but no enjoyment because it's
not social and it actually is not
engaging the prefrontal cortex and the
hippocampus to create memory and so you
you you will you simply will have a
transient experience and the transient
experience will be unsatisfying until
you'll hit the lever again and again and
again and again and it will lower your
quality of life so that's the key thing
if there's something you really really
love so for example I'll ask people will
talk about because I I've done a lot of
work on the on the the science of
addiction and it's a very interesting
subject people say how do you know if
you're addicted because these are
behavioral constructs you know you can't
take a blood test to know if you're if
you're an alcoholic if you're you know
so it's these are behavioral and the big
behavioral thing is do you prefer to
drink alone do you prefer to actually
become inebriated alone that means
you're looking for pleasure versus
enjoyment and that is a that that is has
a lot that will lead you more to
addiction more toward addiction and away
from happiness is the way that that
works that's the reason that people say
never drink alone they don't know what
they're saying is they're saying enjoy
it don't have it be a source of pleasure
because that's dangerous so that gives
you an idea so we've talked a little bit
about satisfaction talk a little bit
about enjoyment these are heavy heavy
topics in terms of the social science
and Neuroscience for sure and we haven't
even touched on meaning which is the
heaviest of them all which is the
hardest of them all so you can become an
a what I really want is I want people to
be to be obsessed with to have their
hobby be the science of happiness and
how they can get it and spread it
because that would be a really
meritorious movement if people were like
yeah more of the science more
understanding it I want to be excellent
at this I want to be most excellent my
hobby is getting better at happiness and
it's changed my life it's a good hobby
it's really been a good hobby for me
yeah I made it into a career that you
most certainly did um so I want to close
the loop on the Fulfillment recipe and
get your take on that so uh you have to
work really hard because that's just
nature ensures that you're going to do
that so that you're out doing the hard
things like getting a meal protecting
your family Etc uh to acquire a set of
skills right that's a big lean on
progress because I agree progress I
think is a foundational pillar of human
happiness right uh so you're going to
work really hard to gain a set of skills
that allow you to serve yourself and
others right and it needs to be in a way
that you find exciting so that to me is
those are the things that nature is
going to ensure that you do and if
you're the doing it for not only
yourself but others is the meaning
portion of this right
um why do is it that people never stop
to identify what gives them meaning is
it that they confuse meaning is that
they're stuck in the me sself why do so
few so few people end up cracking that
code part of the reason is because
they're not specifically trying to find
meaning they don't make it a goal they
just they they a lot of people believe
that if I do what I'm really good at and
I can be successful at that it's going
to give me a ton of meaning
automatically and that's not right like
anything else you have to do things on
purpose did you get meaning when you
were a classical musician no that was
the reason that's the reason I'm not a
classical could you have gotten meaning
out of it many people do but here's the
thing I I my my favorite composer is
Johan Sebastian Vach maybe the greatest
composer who ever lived it's great story
yeah I mean at 1685 to 1750 20 kids he
had 20 kids yeah he was a he was
productive as a composer and as a father
was he Catholic he wasn't he was
Lutheran but um but he was I say that
because I know you're Catholic for those
listening who wonder why I made a joke
about sexy Lutheran but and and and
Bach was asked near the end of his life
why he wrote
music the why question you know our our
friend Simon synic he talks about start
with why and it's fantastic I mean it's
been because it really is you people are
going around asking what and hoping to
get the why for free and Simon's
entrepreneurial twist is start with why
and then the what will come
automatically and you'll be a lot more
satisfied because you'll find the source
of meaning so box why when he was asked
why do you write music was the aim and
Final End of all music is the
refreshment of the soul and the
glorification of God okay not bad not
bad at all but I read that in my late
20s when I was still I was in the
Barcelona Symphony in those days and is
a good job and it was you know I love
the music it's really into it it's kind
of a high Prestige job you know playing
the greatest still sounds cool it sounds
cool sounds cool yeah but I couldn't I
couldn't answer like like that I
couldn't answer like that I didn't feel
like I was refreshing Souls particularly
I certainly didn't feel like I was
glorifying God I was you built that in
though cuz this is one thing I always
think people think they're going to find
mean it just wasn't my thing and so I
went in search of something where I
could answer my why question like
Bach I I became a social scientist that
was the thing that was it because you
know when I I because after that you
also you you go on to run the thing tank
after right right yeah so I got my PhD I
actually finished College a month before
my 30th birthday by correspondence so
this is not a typical path to you know a
professorship at Harvard obviously this
is not typically the way it gets done
this a great country isn't
it yeah um a kid from peup can do this
it's fantastic crazy I love that so um
and then I went and I I got so
interested when I was doing my my
bachelor's degree in the in human
behavior and the fact that you can model
it and you can study it that I I I went
back and got my masters and PhD as a
social scientist as a quantitative
social scientist I was doing for a
living I was doing military operations
research at the Rand Corporation for you
know like secret stuff for the Air Force
and all that but you know using and you
felt the sense of meaning in all that I
was what I felt the sense of meaning in
was I was learning so much that was so
critically interesting and I had a
strong sense that I was going to I was
learning how to a ask and answer
original questions about human behavior
that were going to push the bound
of what we knew so that people's lives
could get better I had a very strong
sense that it was going to it was in the
offing it was going to take decades was
the part about so people's lives could
be better was that a critical part of
that CRI it was a critical thing to earn
my success I needed to do something
where my work created value in my life
and the life of other people that's I
think that that is so big and look you
covered this in the book so I know this
isn't mysterious to you but uh focusing
outward like if you want to be happy we
don't need this is me paraphrasing you
again we don't need self-care we need
other care right and I just have learned
uh through unfortunate trial and error
that if I'm doing something only for me
it I'll run ashore on the M me me
problem totally totally you get into the
me self world it's all me self you know
other care is i s it's I'm going to look
outward at what other people need I'm
going to be thinking more about them
which gets me away from the the boring
repetitive tedium of the me me me soundt
track to begin with I mean it has I mean
it's just simple you're you're
distracted from the stuff that's so
boring and yet so um you look at so
obsessively over the course of your life
so that's critically important and you
find I mean again there's tons and tons
of studies that actually show that the
more you give the happier you get the
more you give the Richer you get the
more you give the better looking you are
is a it's a wonderful study it's all
perception so there's this one study
where These Guys these social
psychologists they they bring men it's a
men into the lab who are were partnered
and it's all heterosexual couples and
they bring them in some have been dating
for 6 months and some have been married
for 50 years and the the guys in white
lap Coates and they say okay it's a
simple experiment I'm going to sir I'm
going to give you these coins put them
in your pocket you and your wife or
girlfriend you're going to walk down
this little path to that other building
down there and my colleague is going to
interview you and then you get to keep
the money that's it okay so I walk down
this little path outside and there's an
Alleyway between the buildings and this
homeless guy comes ambling out of the
alley and panhandles the husband or
boyfriend he's a Confederate to the
experiment obviously he says hey you got
some change he does they know he does
because they put the money in his pocket
he has to make a decision in front of
his wife on whether he's going to help
the homeless guy they get to the other
building and the first question in the
interview is did you help the homeless
guy how much did you give him and then
the second question is to the wife how
attractive do you find him right now the
more you support the homeless guy the
hotter she finds you that's so
interesting that's the reason on on a
first date you're like I love Humanity I
support you know I build houses for the
poor I love dogs I love babies you're
trying to look like you know Albert
schwitzer on a first date that's
hilarious because you're more handsome
that is very interesting okay so um we
know that being outward focused is going
to be beneficial but you were talking
about um you needed to find the answer
to your why what is going to be that
thing that I could answer in the way
that Bach does I find in life basically
nobody finds that like that that is so
rare and when they do find it it ends up
being very transient so how did you
navigate because your for people that
don't know we we did another interview
which I highly encourage them to go
watch and so we covered this I don't
want to tread a ton of the same ground
but I think it's worth telling people
you've would you say that your career
has been spiral yeah for sure okay you
gave me the language mine has for sure
um I I it's interesting you make me
question whether that's just my
personality and I was going to end up
there no matter what or if it really was
what I the story I've told myself my
entire life which is I did all of this
just to get into storytelling and I
needed to control the assets maybe maybe
we'll get into that well those are
that's those are endogenous to each
other yeah maybe yeah but I what I want
to know now is did your why run out and
that's why you reinvented yourself did
it just migrate like how have you kept
that alive in your life I I took
opportunities that were put in my path
that I thought were in line with this
vision of how I was trying to grow so I
had a intention but I didn't have
attachment so when I was a French horn
player leaving that becoming a social
scientist I I had an intention to do
this work on human behavior to as it to
help myself and others to make life
better to increase love and happiness in
other people's lives but I was not
attached to what manifestation that was
going to take and that's what I urge all
young people to do to have a virtuous
beautiful intention without attachment
with respect to the the expression that
it's going to take at any particular
time I taught for a number of years I
loved it super great then I thought I
should run something that I think is
going to be good for Humanity and for
society you know and so I ran this think
tank this big think tank in Washington
DC I 300 employees mostly I just raised
money I had to raise $50 million a year
to keep the doors open and it was a
thrilling experience it was exhausting
to be sure but what I was trying to do
was to use my background as a social
scientist to create better public policy
to hire really good people that was
going to to make the country and the
world Freer and better with an emphasis
on opportunity for people at the margins
of society which is what my Think Tank
was engaged in after about 10 years I
knew I was getting stale man I was
getting stale so I had the same
intention but I had no attachment to
Arthur Brooks president of the American
Enterprise Institute that was a that
would be a disordered attachment because
that's not who I am I'm Arthur br Brooks
I'm a husband I'm a father I'm a child
of God and I am put on Earth to lift
people up in bonds of love and happiness
using science and ideas what's the next
assignment what's the next assignment
and the next assignment was to do what I
do now which is I have a company that
teach writes speaks and teaches widely
and does media on the science of
Happiness to popularize to see the world
as a classro and an enormous course of
study of the science of Happiness to
lift people up and that you know so I
can I have WR have column in the
Atlantic and I write books and I get to
talk to you and I get to travel and
speak I teach at Harvard and it's
phenomenal but that's not I'm not
attached because I know this is not the
last assignment I have intention but the
attachment no no no no no the attachment
is the killer of all these things and
and you too it's like next assignment
please but here's the direction we're
going in I need to do this thing this
thing is going to serve and when you're
really in the zone it's it's a a thrill
it's a thrill you just can't get enough
of it when you're really in the zone too
but it's not because you're going for
the thrill it's because you're going for
the value you want the you want to hit
that vein of value right and when you
run that vein out then you go look for
you dig a new mind what does it mean to
run the vein out though so
um okay how pure was your move into the
the think tank because you talk about
Idol
I've listened to enough of your content
I know what your idol is uh I think we
share an idol um
so I I nothing is either good or bad but
thinking makes it so yeah so I don't
know that having an idol is bad I have a
feeling that it's Nature's way of
getting us moving and making us an
active species and it is how for great
good right exactly but if it's the end
goal if an idol of money or power or
pleasure or fame is the end goal will be
to you and will be under of the world
but if it's an intermediate goal to
lifting people up and bringing them
together if you can use the prestige
that you have in your job and the
admiration of other people to get them
interested in something that's truly
generative and good and improve their
lives which by the way you're doing with
a show right I mean you got lots of
prestige you're famous guy but you're
using it so that people will watch it
and change their lives so if this is the
end goal it's a problem if it's an
intermediate goal then it's good I want
to uh restate this in my language to see
if I really understand this okay so the
Mis self is getting caught up in my
emotions I'm confusing the emotion for
the perception of the emotion so knowing
that in the brain pain and suffering are
two separate spaces knowing literally
two different regions of the brain not
making that up for people listening uh
and then uh in meditation I am to your
point earlier about uh the bitter coffee
that there's a difference between um my
knee hurts and witnessing that I'm
having a sensation in my knee that one
might articulate my KNE hurts versus I
don't like how my knee feels that's
really the big difference because you
know it's my knee hurts it's that's a
statement of fact right right it's a
signal and the one last thing I'll wrap
on that to see if I really get this so
uh Victor Frankle talked about the gap
between stimulus and response now for
people that haven't heard that name he
was in a concentration camp lost his
wife Mom Dad I me just unimaginable
amounts of loss
and came out of it psychiatrist came out
or actually I think a a neur and he was
a psychiatrist and and a psychoanalyst
okay which is an interesting combination
very interesting writes a book about
that time basically saying if you could
find meaning in your suffering that you
could make it but if you lost that sense
he was like you could literally predict
when somebody would die because once
they gave up and they could no longer
associate meaning with why they were
going through the suffering that was it
right and so that idea of there's this
gap between stimulus and response and
you get to decide how you interpret that
thing is everything right is that what
you're talking about when that Gap goes
away You're now in me territory yeah so
so there's there's so much in this and
and you know we've referred to the you
know the new book and there's the whole
front part of this new book is emotional
self-management based on the science of
how your brain gives you signals that
are called emotions getting away from
the idea that bad emotions are
unfortunate we should get rid of them
and or that unhappiness for the is bad
and we should get rid of it so
understanding the science of how this
works and what these things are for and
then being able to learn grow and manage
the feelings that we want such that we
can adapt best to the current world and
we can make growth toward happier that's
that's the whole front part of this book
the back half is okay now that you've
done that build the life you want build
the life you want co-authored with Oprah
Winfrey exactly right exactly right um
good book by the way I'm glad you like
it thank you it's um it was a joy to
write it it's a joy writing a book with
Oprah Winfrey too what an experience it
was really an interesting experience to
and and recording the book the audio
book too because you keep thinking oh I
know that
voice not mine so um so emotional
self-management comes down to number one
understanding that emotions that you
have are not just nice to have and bad
to have all they are are signals they're
like a machine the machine of your brain
perceives outside stimuli and turns it
into a universal language that can that
can send signals to the neocortex of
your brain the out outside wrinkly area
of your brain especially the prefrontal
cortex which is the most modern part of
the human brain to send it signals so
that you can decide how to react
according to them and it doesn't matter
what language you speak or where you
grow up you everybody gets the same
signals they get the basic emotions of
Joy Of Interest which are the two
positive basic emotions the negative
emotions which doesn't mean that they're
bad just means that they're negative
Ang disgust sadness fear and all those
things are then Blended together into
these complex emotions so anger and
disgust you blend them together you get
contempt which is the conviction of the
worthlessness of something so it's this
multiplicity of emotions that we get
they exist to send signals Universal
signals and then we get to decide how to
react here's the problem most people
don't take that opportunity most people
take their emotions as given regret them
like them and act according to them
without out doing that last trick that
last entrepreneurial trick which is
deciding how to react you get to decide
this is Victor frankl's point the book
Is Man's Search for meaning and what he
learned in the concentration camp was
that all these bad things are happening
and good things happen in life you
decide how you're going to react to
these things that's the ultimate
entrepreneurial task of human life is
deciding how you're going to use the
resources under your control and the
first set of resources you get are your
emotions okay okay so the time between
the stimulus and response the time
between the the emotions and the
reactions that you decide that's the Gap
that Victor Frankle is talking about you
want that to be as wide as possible
that's why every time you have an
emotion the most important thing to do
is to not react is to get is to practice
not reacting when you feel something
good or bad way tell tell me why because
this is where I see people get lost all
the time they trust their emotions they
think their emotions are right they a
map of actual reality and that if you
feel angry you should act angry yeah and
that's that's that's that's a great way
to live an unhappy life and make other
people unhappy around you I agree so
violently I can't even tell you yeah
yeah and think about all the times when
you're building your companies that that
you you felt something negative and if
you just yelled that you snapped at
somebody or said that was on your mind
you would have done catastrophic brain
damage to your company it would have
been terrible and instead or you get
that email you know you get an email and
it's like I want I want to I want to
answer right now don't never answer a
bad email in the day you get it never
just have it automat as a matter of fact
have somebody who's managing your email
for you so you don't see them how often
are you checking your credit score
afraid of identity theft or account
breaches we all use the internet every
single day for important things like
Personal Banking and remote work so why
not protect yourself with our sponsor
Aura Aura is an all-in-one cyber
security service that keeps you safe
online Aura identifies data Brokers
exposing your info and submits opt out
requests on your behalf Ora also
monitors your credit tracks your
passwords for data breaches and secures
your online activity with VPN and anti
malware protection you can try Aura for
free for two weeks by clicking the link
in the description or scanning the QR
code you you see them and you think
about it but you can't answer it because
it disappears from your inbox for 24
hours make a deal with somebody why
because you want to you want to your
your your prefrontal cortex to be in
charge you don't want your lyic system
to be in charge it's a 2-year-old you
know when kids when you have little kids
and you know I have I have grown kids
but now I have grandchildren and and
they they yell and and what you tell
little kids always is use your words
what you're telling them is put more
time between stimulus and response and
choose the response that you want you're
not going to say that to a little kid
you're going to say something that's
truncated like use your words and and
people who are reactive what we as
social scientists we call them limic
people because they're they're acting
according to their limic system this is
the most
unrepresented should you distribute it
should you buy something with it what
should you do that that's what good
entrepreneurs do with their lives but
that's how we need to see our emotion so
that's the most important point now what
you do in that Gap is called met a
cognition and this is where it gets
really really interesting in that Gap
the best thing that you can possibly do
is to think about the emotions that
you're feeling what they mean and how
best to use them so that and and this is
this is really the engagement of
prefrontal Cortex that's what meditation
practices tell you to do this is what
prayer helps you to do this is what
walking in nature helps you to do so all
these metacognitive practices this is
what therapy is supposed to do too by
the way it's supposed to give you expert
in expanding that
Gap then on top of that there's all of
these ideas that you can use once you
you've got this time you can make these
decisions you can you can substitute
emotions you can say that's not the
right emotion here's a better emotion
you can literally do that how's that not
just faking it it's not it's what it's
so so for example um I work um I've
talked a lot and and I've been ping
around lately with you know rain Wilson
who's the you know that from the office
on the show he's terrific and and we
grew up he grew up in Ballard yeah yeah
and so five miles away from me he's just
the same age as me he was a classical
musician just like I was I didn't know
him but we have parall he play like
bassoon or something he played the
bassoon I the French hor so we probably
overlapped an all state band or
something as we were kids but we have
the same childhood basically and so it's
interesting and so we really connect on
this but for example he talks about the
fact that most uh he believes that most
comedians suffer from depression and one
of the reasons they're such good
comedians is because they choose the
substitute emotion when they're feeling
sadness of humor which is also an
appropriate response to things that are
making you sad you make them into a joke
and people think of it as a defense
mechanism no it's an emotional
substitution you know it's the when you
drink coffee the the the caffeine
molecule it looks just like the
adenosine molecule which is a neurom
modulator that that is inhibitory it
makes you feel tired it goes into the
slot into the neuro the receptor for the
adenosine and so you don't get adenosine
that's what makes you feel pey it blocks
the thing that makes you feel tired
that's how caffeine Works emotional
substitution works in the same way the
humor molecule goes into the sadness
receptor but you can't do that unless
you're taking time you cannot do that
unless you actually expand the time
between stimulus and response until you
understand exactly how the science works
and and getting as much time as you
possibly can was that the angle that you
took to understand the science or did
you come at it from a God says that this
is the way to go about life I'm a
scientist you know and one of the
reasons that I am religious is because
of my because what I've learned
intellectually so for me that was the
the thing that freed me as well was so
I'm call it 22 I am very unhappy like
really scary sliding towards depression
unhappy and I started reading about the
brain now I don't remember what gave me
that impulse it was probably something I
learned in college plus dosm whatever
but it like really made me think about
the way the brain works
and I started reading about how brain
plasticity was this hotly debated thing
and maybe you really could teach an old
dog new tricks and one day I just
decided I'm going to act as if brain
plasticity is real right and then the
more studies came out that showed that
it really was real like the more I felt
like I could grab a hold of that but it
was it was a science based Insight that
allowed me to really change the tenor of
my entire life for sure for sure I mean
it's interesting because people back
when when I was a kid I'm you know 10
years old little 10 years older than you
when I was a kid or even when people
were older who than me were coming
through that the whole idea was that
biology is just psychology you know that
you can you can think bad things away
and that was supposed to be really
incredibly empowering now really what we
believe with the Advent of you know the
advances Neuroscience you know as a
social scientist I have to know tons of
Neuroscience teaching happiness is 30%
Neuroscience what I teach I'm talking
about the brain constantly it's much
more the case we believe that psychology
is actually biology facts and and that
sounds like it's not empowering like
this is all determined EMP it's super
empowering because once you actually
understand the process you can intervene
in the process I talked to Young
Executives for example I say one of the
biggest threats to your career is an
inappropriate sexual relationship in the
workplace that's so hilarious to me it's
and and and so we say so let's
understand how this is going to work and
you can psychologize it and say you know
you need to get get some therapy no no
no no no what happens is the first thing
when you have a when you have attraction
towards somebody who's a potential
romantic partner there's the first thing
that happens is sex hormones with
testosterone and estrogen and in in
combination in both males and females
this is happening the second thing that
happens in the neurochemical Cascade of
falling in love is there's an up um and
there's a an increase in neopine phrine
and dopamine so that you get the sense
of euphoria and anticipation the third
thing that happens is a drop in
serotonin now what happens when
serotonin a drop in serotonin when
serotonin drops it makes you ruminate
that's the reason it's associated with
clinical depression because of the
rumination procedure it's it's a there's
a part of the brain called the
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex which is
incredibly active when you're ruminating
it it's one of the things when you're
ruminating on a business plan on an
opera on a poem on somebody who's
rejected you on you know and so it's
it's it's you see it incredibly active
in depression and creativity and falling
in love and all of these things that all
have rumination you know iterative
rumination involved in it so it all is
involved with a drop in serota which is
why you don't want to have that early
stage of the falling in love for the
rest of your life because you'll want to
die oh and then and then the last you
want to die the early stages of Love
made me feel like I'd never get anything
done again yeah yeah it makes you feel
out of control your brain looks
suspiciously like in the brain of a a
methamphetamine addict you know that's
how it felt I legitimately felt like I
was on Dr and then you get the tide the
warm tide that comes in of the increases
an oxytocin which is a bonding
neuropeptide that functions as bra
reciprocated you you well I mean what it
happens when you have eye contact with
somebody in a love connection and eye
contact so you're both getting it the
biggest bolus that you get of that is
when you first lay eyes on on eye
contact with your newborn baby really
yeah it's just like fourth of ju in your
head but anyway so it's 1 2 3 4 that's
the neurochemical Cascade and the reason
I bring this up is when talking to young
people in business I say if you do not
intervene early enough in this
neurochemical Cascade you're going to be
in trouble because it'll be out of
control it'll be like you know no breaks
on the roller
coaster and and he was like I have this
incredible career and this incredible
job I don't know what happened we slept
together and now I'm fired and you see
it all the time like Harvard Business
School case study uh what happened well
they let the neurochemical Cascade go
too long and you have to intervene
number one don't don't put yourself in a
position where you go to step two don't
put yourself in a position where you go
to step three what are you doing you're
managing your brain and if you don't
know the brain science you can't do that
that's why the stuff is so incredibly
empowering and when you read that stuff
for the first time you're like oh
there's something I can do here now
there's something I can use this is not
just
psychology now it's something that's
more tangible than that because the the
Grandeur of this entire experience has a
biological basis and one that I can
understand and one I can I can actually
manage yeah for me being able to picture
the thing that helps a lot yeah once I
could understand um the myelination
process I was like okay now I get why
this is something I need to repeat once
I understood that the the brain is a
caloric hog and from an evolutionary
standpoint that means anything that you
do repeatedly it's going to hardwire
just to make it more efficient and so
all of that coming together really
allowed me to begin to improve well yeah
because your habits what they were doing
was improving the management of the
organ and and that was affecting your
psychology and your Effectiveness and
your happiness and and the whole you
know the progress that you're making in
your life that's why in the information
is so critically important that's why it
can be so lifechanging to learn science
actually for sure so what are then the
habits of happiness or maybe a better
way this is the language you use in the
book the
macronutrients of happiness
build if Tove so people to happiness in
a lot of different ways but the biggest
mistake that people make make is
thinking that it's a feeling that
happiness is a feeling oo it's not a
feeling happiness has no happiness has
feelings associated with it okay but to
say that my Thanksgiving turkey has a
smell is different than saying that the
smell of the turkey is the Thanksgiving
dinner right so that's a really big
distinction that it's important to make
so your Thanksgiving dinner is protein
carbohydrates and fat that's literally
what your Thanksgiving dinner is it also
has a delicious smell that attracts you
to it and that you want and if it didn't
have that or had the wrong smell it
smelled like you were you know
microwaving trash when you walked into
Mom's house for Thanksgiving you'd be
like something's wrong here so but
getting past the feelings on happiness
is what will set you free to be able to
manage it appropriately why do so many
people feel lost and unhappy and what
can they do about it people feel lost
and unhappy is basically part of what it
means to be human and there's a there's
an irony in the having the big brains
that we do we developed a very large
human brain over the past 40 million
years for all kinds of reasons I mean
it's the it's it gives us a it's our
genetic advantage that we could say it
gives us help it's our survival we're
not fast you know we're not very good
climbers you know we don't have a lot of
hair on our bodies but we got big these
got these big prefrontal cortex of the
brain the problem with that is that we
can understand ourselves where the only
species as far as we know that knows
that you know Tom knows he's going to
die for example you can understand the
nature of your own existence but you you
can't actually make your own existence
work in a fundamentally different way
and so knowing yourself that the essence
of Consciousness is one that that gives
you incredible transcendental
information but at the same time it
programs in a whole lot of misery so for
for example you know we have a tendency
to to our our genetic ities Force us to
chase money and power and admiration and
pleasure because those are the things
that help you pass on your genes you get
more animal skins and and flints and
buffalo jerky in your cave and you're
going to have more mates basically and
so mother nature wants you to do that
but it's not going to make you happy and
you think that you want to be happy the
big prefrontal cortex says I want to be
happy because you're so conscious but
the things that will help you pass on
your jeans are not the things that are
going to make you you happy Mother
Nature doesn't care if you're happy and
that's why it's so much more work if it
if you live by if it feels good do it
you're going to be a you're going to be
a mess that's comes but so true so I had
a realization a long time ago I'm very
grateful that this happened early it was
of course born of misery but I became so
profoundly unhappy chasing money I used
to show up every day saying I am here to
get rich and that provided me a lot of
energy so as a child of the 80s growing
up in Tacoma
so and I really grew up on the edge of
Tacoma it's probably more accurate even
though my address really was Tacoma it's
more accurate to say I grew up in PE up
yeah where the fair was oh yes or the
Western Washington State Fair now the
Washington State Fair that is all
accurate and I it felt almost Rural and
so I felt like I was living in the
middle of nowhere and John Hughes films
showed me sort of this upper middle
class Chicago suburb and I was obsessed
with getting a big house and so I used
to tell everybody I'm going to get rich
I'm going to get rich and my family was
like and I had friends that like and I
could literally walk to a trailer park
it was like that kind of part of Tacoma
and so my family who were all sort of
blue collar just thought that was
hilarious and they're like yeah right
and but that I was really obsessed and
so I um were you a good student were you
I was but I was cheating so I was really
I did very well in high school from
cheating and then in literally from
cheating yeah like I was Charming so I
could get away with murder whether
incredibly clever oo that's interesting
my identity is not that of someone who
was clever so it was was very much
somebody who was Charming so I could
make people laugh and so I could get
away with things so whether that was
asking my friends to let me literally
take the test off of their desk and put
it on mine so I could show my work right
but of course I was showing their work
uh but when I got to college and I'm not
even sure what gave me this Insight but
I was like I'm going to be spending a
lot of money taking on a lot of debt I
should actually learn what I'm here to
learn so I set a mantra to myself sink
or swim a or F I won't cheat not even
once and so and I ended up doing very
well in fact I did better in college
than I did in high school were you happy
in college I was I was it when I
graduated though I was like I'll never
go back I'm not one of those people was
like oh I'm going to get a master's and
then a PhD I was like get me the [__]
out of here
but it was was film so it was amazing
yeah and you were living by the dictates
of your own Integrity you were a man
Fully Alive you were not shading the
truth very true he's very important and
this is what's you know this is there
there's a famous speech by you know an
and and I can't remember who it was the
guy who went on to become the president
of the University of Texas who gave
became famous because he gave a an a a a
a commencement speech that was about
make your bed if you want to actually
get your life on track start by making
your bed what that was was uh to ask
people to become men and women of
integrity and that means even when
nobody's looking at your bed make your
bed because you're a person of Integrity
you went to college and you said to
yourself I'm going to be a person of
Integrity I am not going to do that
thing because that thing is not the
right thing and so doing you ordered
your mind in a different way it's really
interesting so I wish that my life was
like a straight trajectory after that
but it becomes the darkest period of my
life becomes right after college when I
feel lost I feel hopeless I have no
sense of how I'm going to put things
together that was a really scary time
because when you don't feel that you can
affect the change that you want it
really for me any well let's go back to
what you said at the beginning so I call
that the directives of evolution so if
you think of ai ai has to be given
instructions you have to want a high
scorer you have to want to stay within
the lanes of your car whatever and
humans as Nature's AI need directives
and so like you said get a mate that's
definitely one of them and man I really
hope at some point later in the
conversation after we've really g into
your book we get to the fact that people
are 30% less likely to get laid now
which is absolutely [__] terrifying
to me um but I have the solution for
greater happiness on college campuses
really it's more love yeah now what do
you mean by that though I mean actually
more relationships more romantic
relationships this would actually solve
a lot of the misery on college campuses
today actually is I mean what were you
trying to do in college you probably
wanted to fall in love
right no so I I didn't so I had a
girlfriend at the very beginning of
college like the first few weeks who ID
met in high school right and I broke up
with her and re decided that to get into
film school I had to really buckle down
and I wasn't going to date I wasn't
going to party I wasn't going to drink I
wasn't going to do drugs and so I
effectively locked myself in a room for
4 years to get good at film making so it
was a very a different kind experience
to a lot of people but now I want to I
want to get people back to your book
because it is absolutely life-changing
so I would show up every day trying to
get rich that was my whole shtick as an
entrepreneur yep and then because I
wanted to build the studio right became
profoundly unhappy pursuing that and the
lesson that I ultimately ended up
learning was that all that matters in
life is how you feel about yourself when
you're by yourself and so meaning and
purpose matter right and so I had better
figure out that money wasn't going to
bring me happiness I was living the
cliche and so I needed to attach meaning
and purpose to what I was do how did you
figured that out that money was not
going to bring you happiness so so on
paper I was worth more money than I'd
ever been worth so I was making more
than I'd ever made I was making like
maybe 80 85,000 something like that
which for me that was at the time that
was a lot of money and on paper I was
worth about $2 million so I was like
okay theoretically and paper money is
very different than real money but on
paper I was worth millions of dollars
and I was still profoundly unhappy so I
was like and did you think what did you
think if I'm get like know see your your
lyic system of your brain saying Tom go
for the money then you'll be happy so
what did you imagine was going to happen
to you if you had a bunch of money that
would actually make you happy or did you
actually form an image at all you just
thought that if I have more money I'm
going to mysteriously be happy happy yes
then once I wasn't I asked myself maybe
the right question which is what did
yeah what did I think was going to
happen and I realized that I thought I
would feel about myself the way that I
felt about other people when that had
money when I looked at them ah yes and I
admired them comp myself got it and you
would actually so social comparison LED
you to the admiration of other people
who had been successful so therefore you
would have that a sort of an admiration
of yourself and that self admiration
would have been the Genesis of your of
your new found happiness on the basis of
your money and if I were as able to
articulate that to myself as you were
just now I could have saved myself a lot
of struggle but uh I couldn't either at
22 but yeah reading your book really
began to bring home this idea that there
are two different types of intelligence
and so at the time I'm haunted by this
idea genius is a young man's game I feel
like a really late bloomer I end up
spending all this time chasing money not
I take this huge break from pursuing my
passion and building that skill set so
now I really feel like I'm behind the
eightball and my whole life has felt
like that and reading your book and the
whole punchline of there's these two
grand movements in your life and if you
understand them then you really can
avoid this Decline and misery right you
open your book with a story that I will
never forget and when I put the book
down I was like running around the
office like telling anybody who would
listen to that story if you don't mind
yeah walk people through the
airplane 10 years ago I was the
president of a think tank in Washington
DC and I was having
these profoundly disturbing thoughts am
I on the right track where does this
lead what is my goal but you're really
successful at this point yeah I mean
successful for you know for
entrepreneurs in Southern California you
know what is successful mean to be the
president of a think tank in Washington
d maybe not so much but everybody's got
a dream it's a great country isn't it
and I was the president of a of a big
prominent think tank in Washington DC
and I was in my late 40s I was more or
less the same age that you are right now
I was looking at my life saying okay
buddy what's the end game and look I had
done resech I'm a social scientist I do
work on human behavior and I had never
really trained these tools on myself and
I I was really disturbed by this because
I didn't actually see what the future
could actually bring that would be
better where I would be happier and as I
was kind of going through this I was
doing what I always did which is
basically fly around and ask people for
money I was a non-profit organization I
had to raise $50 million a year and I
was giving 175 speeches a year which is
super fun I love Jes yeah yeah and so
it's like running for the Senate and
never getting elected basically which is
you know for running for the Senate
that's probably the best thing so you
don't have to be a senator and as I was
thinking about this kind of an
existential crisis you know what am I
what path am I on what am I supposed to
do I mean some of that was evident I was
I have a family I'm I'm in love with my
wife I I I love my kids but I didn't
have an understanding of the the course
of my life I mean my religious life is
figured out but I don't understand what
I'm supposed to be doing what is Arthur
Brook supposed to be doing such that I
can be happier as a person and frankly I
wasn't very happy for lots of reasons
that anybody can understand I mean and
and I heard a conversation behind me on
a plane one night that changed my entire
Direction it was a couple and I could it
was night time it was like about 11
o'clock at night and I so it was dark
and so people were doing what people do
on airplanes at 11 o'clock at night you
know they're drinking or they're or
they're watching a movie or they're
sleeping but I could hear a couple
talking and I could tell it was a man
and a woman I could tell by their voices
that they were elderly clearly
old and I suppose that they were
probably married based on their
conversation I couldn't quite make out
the husband's words because he was sort
of mumbling but the wife's voice was
very penetrating it was coming through
the chairs and she's he mumbles and he
she she says don't say it would be
better if you were dead and then he
mumbles some more and she says it's not
true that nobody remembers you it's not
true that nobody appreciates you anymore
and I'm thinking this is a guy who holy
cow he's he's not he's not a big shot
he's not an entrepreneur he's not you
know he's not somebody who lived up to
his own expectations he got the he got
the experience or the education or the
job that he wanted and now life is kind
of over and he's disappointed and that
makes sense or it made sense to me
because look if you're a big shot then
you're going to die happy huh and the
lights go on at the end of the flight an
hour later or so and I'm kind of curious
It's not prent interest but look you
know this is my laboratory as a social
scientist it is an overheard
conversation perhaps and and so I turn
around and it's one of the most famous
men in the world this is somebody who's
going to do 10 times as much with his
life as I ever am he's Rich he's famous
he's universally admired he's not
controversial for stuff that he did many
many years ago
and I thought to
myself my whole model is wrong the
problem that I have the direction that
I'm going is incorrect because my model
of of of satisfaction is wrong here's
the model the world tells you here the
the lyic system of your brain the
ancient part of your brain that was
extant a million years ago and all of
marketing and entertainment which is a a
a distributed digital lyic system says
work hard make money be successful be
admired be end IED Bank it die happy and
it's wrong and and you know in your
heart it's wrong because you're I was
asking yourself hey Tom what have you
done for me lately that's what your mind
is asking you it's not good enough that
you founded a company a long time ago
and it made a bunch of money it's not
good enough we we need to excel we need
to achieve we need to create value
that's how we're created as people and
this guy was blowing away the
the world's theory of Happiness of
satisfaction and I said to myself I
don't want to be explaining to my wife
Esther on a plane 30 years from now 40
years from now I might as well be dead
and so I set myself to crack the code
what can I do and by the way the data
are very clear that the people who have
the earliest success the mindblowing
success they're the most likely to be
unsatisfied with their lives at the end
of their life lives the story that you
tell about Darwin was unnerving he could
have been the man on the plane Charles
Darwin who is on anybody's list of the
three greatest scientists of all time he
was the Talk of the Town his name Rings
through the anals of History man he's a
hero this is I think I may have been
even more struck by the Darwin
confession than the guy many many people
who we Revere today who had early
astonishing
success they died unhappy but we don't
record that we record their success not
the unhappiness with their life later on
Charles Darwin had his greatest
successes starting when he was 27 years
old we all know that he visited the
galpagos islands on the on the Voyage of
the beagle which is a 5year sailing
Voyage around the world to collect
plants and animals and send them back to
England he was getting quite famous in
his absence but when he got back he
drops this intellectual atomic bomb
which is the ideas that led to his
theory of natural selection AKA
Evolution and for 30 years I mean he was
I mean he was rich he was famous he was
the man but then his progress stopped it
stopped because because he didn't have
the mathematical ability to keep up with
his own research his research passed him
by technically and there was a there was
actually an advance that he needed that
today we call genetics that he couldn't
understand it was written in German he
didn't study German he was a bad student
he didn't do his mathematics homework he
never learned very much about statistics
and so the result was that he was left
in the dust which happens to people in
their 40s and and most most their early
50s based on their early success and he
spent the last 20 years of his life
complaining about the disappointing I
mean he wrote 11 books after that point
but they're all sort of derivative
they're like straw and he said I don't
have the energy to do any work that I
really find satisfying to his friends
and you know he died disappointed he
died sad the great maybe the greatest
naturalist of all time died sad he could
have been the man on the plane and this
is not what the world tells you the
world says bust your pick get as as
early as you can get bet 10,000 hours
man kill it kill it Bank it you know and
but if if if so what you know the the
cinon of Happiness Excellence retire at
40 well how many people do you know
who've done that who've actually gotten
happier who retired at 40 I know none
the point is that's not how human
endeavor actually works and so we need a
better model and I saw that I did the
research and I said time to build a
better model that actually describes the
Dynamics of human experience that
actually digs into what actually brings
us happiness and that's what my research
is about that's why I'm dedicating the
rest of my life to exploring all right
so to put a fine point on it the
punchline ends up being there's two
kinds of intelligence so type one is
fluid sort of raw intelligence it's
Darwin's genius was fluid intelligence
it's Innovative capacity it's what made
tomt which is your indefatigable energy
your focus your ability to get better
and better to be the ninja in your
particular field which gets better and
better in through your 20 it sounds sexy
even as you're saying it that that's
what I find so horrifying that's hustle
culture man hustle culture rewards that
and and by the way and it's been an
awesome ride oh and super addictive it's
super it actually works on the same
dopamine Pathways as you know
methamphetamines and alcohol yes it is
my one addiction success addiction yeah
it's a killer and you you I write about
it in the book about the success
addiction that virtually all
entrepreneurs virtually all Strivers
have you can be you know the ace
electrician and have a success addiction
because we are wired to want to be
excellent and to be admired which leads
you to get better and better and better
at what you do using what we've
identified as what psychologists have
identified for a long time now as fluid
intelligence your the structure of your
brain lends itself to just incredible
energy and focus and to get better and
better and better as an individual at
solving any problem faster than others
the problem is this is the problem that
led to Darwin's misery and so many
others it peaks in your late 30s or
early 40s and then it declines and then
it declines faster and if you try to
keep your group prove you're going to
ride that thing to the basement and
you're going to be the man on the plane
you're going to be Darwin you're going
to be bitter and unhappy and most people
think they get one curve that's the bad
news the good news is that's not your
only curve you have a second curve that
comes in behind it which is not your
fluid intelligence which goes up Peaks
comes down it's your crystallized
intelligence your wisdom which doesn't
have fast working memory the Innovative
capacity is not as good but it's your
ability to identify patterns to use the
information in your environment it's
like having the New York Public Library
at your disposal it takes a while to get
the information like I can't remember
that thing because it's on the fourth
floor back in the stacks I got to send
my guy to get it but it's in there and
you can use this information to be a
teacher to be a historian to have actual
wisdom that's what you get better at
through your 40s and 50s and you can
stay high in your 60s and 70s and Beyond
that's your true success curve as you
get older the key is you got to walk
from fluid intelligence over to
crystallized intelligence you got to
walk from the Star litigator to the
managing partner from the from the
Innovative startup entrepreneur to the
venture capitalist from the from the
mathematical researcher to the professor
those are the different curves you got
to go from one to the other and if
you're stuck on the first and if that's
your vision of your own greatness and
you can't be thrown off that you'll be
chasing that for the rest of your life
even though it's just it's in it's in
the basement and you can't get it back
so there are some people that can wake
themselves up out of the Matrix other
people that must be awoken I do fear
sometimes that I need to be awoken uh
but you woke yourself up I'm so curious
so you're doing your thing you're very
successful and I don't know maybe and I
guess we should tell people that you
started out as a musician a French horn
player nonetheless very specific yes and
very esoteric and made a living as a
professional
French if I'm not mistaken exactly right
all right so you're killing that game
but you realize that you're declining do
you think that going on that is what
allowed you to then consciously step
away while it seems like you were still
in your Prime as the leader the
president of this Think Tank I got very
lucky I got very lucky that I failed my
first career and after having a lot of
success I went into early Decline and
out of desperation to support my family
and to have a future out of my 20s I had
to change gears I didn't have a college
education I dropped out of college you
know dropped out kicked out splitting
hairs when I was 19 um I and I went on
the road as a as a musician with as my
parents call it the Gap my Gap decade
right which you can imagine how fun that
was for them and you know I kind of made
a living kind of made my rent you know
but I was I was living my best life
because I was a young guy I didn't have
health insurance I didn't go to the
dentist for six years at one point which
I'm still paying for
and but like I've told friends I um I
never missed a day without cigarettes so
you know you you figure out what my
priorities were at that particular point
in my life and fortunately I gave that
up a long time ago but I was going into
decline as a French horn player and
things that used to be easy became hard
and things that were hard became
impossible and I saw the writing on the
wall I saw a lot of older classical
musicians who were deeply alcoholic and
unhappy and had been good and now
weren't and didn't have the respect of
the younger people that were having a
harder time making a living and I
thought look I'm barely making a living
now I'm ambitious and it's going well I
mean look I was in the Barcelona
Symphony so I was making a middle class
living and that's a good Orchestra but I
knew that I couldn't keep it up and so I
I had to change just by necessity I had
to change and I went back to college got
my college degree by
correspondence um and at 31 left to
start my PhD that by the way that's not
just an arbitrary thing that's the
family business my father was a college
professor my grandfather was a college
professor so I knew that business more
better than any other I know how to do a
PhD my father was working on his PhD
even when I was a kid so I saw that
whole process that wasn't foreign or
exotic to me at all and I knew what
professors do for a living and I said
okay I can do that because I know that I
was VE I was very ashamed I was just I
felt horrible about myself that I had
that I I had failed at this thing that
was everything to me I mean I there were
I would have just as soon died than to
not be a French horn player CU there was
nothing else but I didn't die and I
couldn't die because I was a married man
I was in love with my wife and and you
know we were going to have kids and what
what was I going to do I mean you were
you honest with her about what you're
going through at that point yeah yeah
she knew well she knew full well I mean
she knows me I'm an open world I'm an
open book with her and U I mean she's
also
smart and you know we she she knows me
super well in no small part because when
we were dating um we didn't speak the
same language and we spoke
rudimentary amounts of the the same
language for the entire first year of
our marriage oh you got to know each
other you get to know each other in a in
a deep human way when you actually can't
talk cuz you can't
lie I recommend this to everybody that's
really unexpected yeah yeah yeah how did
you fall in love if you guys weren't
speaking the same Lang you saw her I was
24 she's a rock and roll singer from
Barcelona she's beautiful and she's
lovely and she's kind and she's smart
and weirdly she liked me and so um and I
threw in big time I moved to Barcelona
to try to convince her to marry me
without speaking a word of the same
language this is what entrepreneurs do
right it's the ultimate entrepreneurial
experience is to give away your heart
and and to take a chance that's what
young people today they're so
non-entrepreneurial if they're unwilling
to fall in love because that I mean
forget the companies forget the money
forget all the cool stuff that you and
I've been able to do professionally fall
in love that's
entrepreneurship right that's the big
bad I've never heard anybody describe it
like that well entrepreneur risk taking
like why entrepreneurship is taking a
big risk in in in looking for major
rewards for explosive returns I'm not
going to tell you how to denominate
those returns it's faith in resources
that you don't already have in hand
these are the characteristics of the
entrepreneur when I was writing a
textbook on entrepreneurship I was
looking at that and I'm saying it's a
it's a big mistake to talk about this in
terms of money
we should be talking about this in terms
of love because that's the currency of
life and when a whole generation of
young people are miserable because
they're comfortable putting millions of
people people's dollars at risk to start
a company but they're unwilling to go
bankrupt in their relationships they're
unwilling to have somebody crush them by
breaking up with them they're just not
very entrepreneurial that's the problem
we have people who are too
non-entrepreneurial which is one of the
reasons that we have too few people who
are in love today as far as I'm
concerned so that that was the thing man
I took that I jumped I did that I did
that and that that was actually very
good because that gave me a lot of
confidence that I could conquer my fear
I could take a risk I mean look it was
it was a very low chance this was going
to work out and we're going to learn
each other's language and she's going to
realize I'm a hopeless stoe or something
or we're not going to love each other or
something and we just celebrated our
30th wedding anniversary congratulations
we have three adult
children incredible it's amazing so so
that was we know each other deeply
deeply deeply she knows all of my
nonsense because she knows it without
the words you can shade all kinds of
Truth with with words you can't when
it's just your heart you're just a heart
to
heart and that's really unexpected
that's very intriguing to me I would
because I have leaned on language so
heavily in my life in fact if there's
anything so I once went live for 24
hours as a thing like to celebrate
hitting a certain number on Facebook I
don't even remember now what number but
went live for 24 hours and then
literally I that morning or the next
afternoon whatever I flew to London and
then uh I did an event with no
microphone and I spoke for nine hours so
at the end of that something happened to
my my vocal cords and I was having a
hard time talking and I could feel like
my throat would click so so distressing
go to a a therapist they stick a camera
down my throat the whole nine like
trying to figure out what did I do and I
start really worrying what does my life
look like if I can't speak yeah and that
was the first time where I was like whoa
like imagine losing that thing that made
you you and I've always been highly
verbal that was always the thing that I
could terrible at math got horrendous
SAT scores but I'm highly verb you're
extremely expressive you're extremely
expressive I will give you that I'll
take that it's absolutely true so and I
thought oo God what happens if I lose my
voice so I can't imagine trying to court
the woman who is now my wife almost 20
years uh uh without my voice that's
interesting that and me too look I mean
I talk for a living I literally I mean
blah blah blah that's what I do for a
living did it not hit you then that like
oh God I'm taking away my superpower
well I was a French horn player okay so
you guys connected over music yeah well
we were at a music festival in France in
dong in France that's how you met yeah
and I was on tour and she was studying
with and she was studying with a teacher
an American teacher there and we met at
this music festival and and and we were
playing music and that's what you did
and so that that made it a little bit
easier I mean we were less reliant on on
talking yeah than than than I am
today yeah that's awesome yeah yeah for
sure and so that was you know when I
went into the client as a musician she
was right there to be helpful and she
gave me she gave me the courage yeah was
she warm about it or was she super warm
she said I was deeply unhappy because I
was in Decline look humans are not
intended to decline decline is hugely
painful because happiness comes from
progress unhappiness comes from regress
and when you feel that something is
harder than it used to be so it's
interesting you know you see this the
decline in the fluid intelligence care
we just talked about if you're really a
striver
um and that's who I'm working with I'm
working with people want to make the
most with their lives you if you look if
you never do anything with your life
you're not going to know it's over
you're not going to have this big crisis
at the end of your life it's because you
never did anything and I like I watched
a lot of TV awesome and like and I can
still do that don't you think their
whole life is a crisis not really no
actually no no not really no yeah no for
sure I mean well here's the thing it
depends on what you mean by happiness
and what a good life is you know I want
my life as a striver but I also
recognize that it's not normal in many
ways to strive and not to strive to the
extent that you have but is that what
you mean by it's not normal yeah and it
it creates problems I mean you you you
re hell on yourself yep when you're
actually doing the stuff that you've
done and there's a lot of ways you could
have had a much easier life a much more
relaxing life a life with greater peace
yeah for sure so that's all I mean it's
it's not a very profound point in that
way but when I you know when I was when
things were going poorly and I was
deeply unhappy because I was in a state
of regress my wife said you're unhappy
you just need to quit and I said that's
insane I mean like one can't just walk
away but of course and she said yes you
can absolutely you can do anything you
want I said we'll be poor she said we're
already
poor you how do you know you it's you
know multiplying by zero is still zero
and uh and so we did we just we we
bailed you know we went to we left
Barcelona we moved to boka Ron Florida
where nobody knew us I took a pretty
easy teaching job and I started studying
by correspondence at night nobody knew I
was doing it she had a minimum wage job
she spoke very poor English had not
graduated from high school um and so was
learning English and making you know six
bucks an hour or whatever it was and I
was getting paid to teach the French
horn while secretly working on my
bachelor's degree at night to build my
to to rebuild the person that I was and
then finished that went on to and
started my PhD which is what I really
thought I needed to do and that took me
a I came here to Los Angeles as a matter
of fact and studied the Rand graduate
school in Santa Monica and then I
learned a new trade I learned I actually
learned who I was as a person again for
the first time but it was like four
years of you know it was weird I
couldn't I remember trying to sign a
check during that time and I couldn't
replicate my own
signature and it turns out that that's
actually quite frequent when people in
this period of liminality between faces
of their life that their handwriting
will change what yeah
yeah it's actually a common occurrence I
didn't know like I'm trying to send a
check for the bank like sorry Mr Brooks
this is not the right signature is it is
it because there's a subconscious part
of you that's like I'm not that person
anymore it's I don't it's it's not well
understood but there's a the the
neurophysiology of a lot of this stuff
is we're just starting to understand
there's no doubt something that where
these things are connected where your
sense of yourself is somehow connected
to to you know these motor skills in a
particular way I couldn't replicate my
own signature sufficiently I got like
rejected by the bank for cashing a check
into my own account at one point I'm
like my my my early dementia I mean what
early stage something what's going on
here and what it was was I was in this
profound state of liminality which in
retrospect was this just fertile period
you know I tell the story in the book is
a place that you and I both know as
Pacific Northwest guys there's a place
called Lincoln city in Oregon that's
you're near just north of Newport and I
used to go there cuz my my aunt was the
receptionist a hotel and she had she
lived in a trailer near the beach and it
was like this Bliss I used to go there
and I remember the first time I was
trying to fish off the rocks in in
Lincoln City Oregon I was catching
nothing this old guy lived in a shack is
watching me and he comes up he says kid
I've been I've been watching you you
know today he'd be arrested but and and
I said he said you're not catching
anything right I said no he says cuz
you're doing it wrong you can't catch
any fish unless it's a falling tide
that's when the tide is going out very
quickly rushing out between the rocks
and I'm like well all the fish are gone
right he says no no no you'll see it's
stirring up the Plankton the fish go
crazy it's happening in 45 minutes he
has his fishing pole we throw our we
throw our lines in and we're pulling
them out by you know by the tens it's
unbelievable and and afterward he's
feeling sort of philosophical he lights
up a cigarette on the Rocks I'm 11 or
something and he says Hey kid you know
during a falling tide you can only make
one mistake I said what's that he said
not having your line in the water and I
have learned this that the time between
the tides of your life the falling tide
of your life looks like you're losing
everything get your line in the water
because that's the most fertile period
of your life so what does it mean to
have your line in the water you must try
new things you must be fully Alive you
must try everything you possibly can you
must I need you to Define Fully Alive to
be to to wake up each day and to live
that day full of possibility not to
nurse your wounds not to waste your time
not to try to do things that you used to
do to be fully Alive is to be alive to
the new set of experiences that's that's
coming across the
transom that's super important because
during this time of liminality there's
by the way there's a lot of research on
this this is not just an anecdote about
you know this kid fishing in Oregon this
is there's a lot of research that shows
that this time between periods in your
life which there's a guy named Bruce fer
who's who writes a book about
Transitions and he said during these
life Quakes you know if your if your
spouse just left you that's a fertile
Peri period for you to learn new things
if you you know you've lost somebody to
death if you've if you're if you're
going through chemotherapy for example
this is and you and you're very afraid
you just been through a pandemic for
example for example if you during the
pandemic many people find that despite
the fact that they hated and were
insecure and it was horrible that their
lives transformed for the good that in
terms of what we're talking about here
the two curves fluid and crystallized
intelligence that period between the two
where you're you're declining in one and
the other's increasing but you don't
know how to get on it or even what it
means that's your most fertile period
That's when things are can be absolutely
magic they're not going to be fun you
might not be happy but that's when magic
can happen and the thing I try to
convince everybody is look somebody
that's had the kind of success that most
people only dream
of nothing has come close to giving me
as much joy fulfillment anything
protection from the downside all of it
other than my Merit
my marriage is the thing that I protect
most fiercely I am not worried about
losing my money I'm not worried about
losing uh accolades I am terrified of
losing my wife yeah yeah and and and
Market can have a horrible day and you
don't like it but your wife is really
mad at you and you're bummed yeah yeah
even even if you know she's not going to
divorce you you're bummed because you
don't want the person you love the most
to be upset with you you want her to be
happy with you cuz what's happened is
basically like your stock market
radically tanking the stock market of
what really matters in your life is the
way that that works out it's actually a
really interesting way to think about it
okay so if that is the thing if that's
the thing that's going to really the
thing that we're pursuing is love and a
bunch of different guyses but the
relationship that's going to be most
important to us is the relationship with
our spouse how do we do that well and
let's start at the beginning so one
thing you've said is delete your dating
apps yeah yeah or there there are some
people who you know wind up meeting
their partner and getting married based
on dating apps but dating apps the
evidence suggests that it's making
dating harder it's actually why would be
true because it's making it harder to
find somebody with you with whom you can
have the complex connection that's
appropriate for a couple different
reasons number one is the Paradox of
choice so dating apps give you too much
choice and so what that means is that
there's always something better so are
you saying Settle yeah yeah well part of
the reason is because you're not going
to find the perfect person you're going
to make the perfect relationship o
That's the Way relationships really work
you know people think I'm going to find
I mean I mean magical thinking is a huge
problem love at first sight doesn't
exist and soulmates don't exist right I
mean I I believe that God wants me to be
with my wife but that's an entirely
different thing than saying that there
was this there was one woman in the
world and she lived in Barcelona and she
was a little girl and I was grown up in
Seattle and the whole no no no
circumstances were such that I met the
person that was going one of the people
that could have been perfect for me if I
work to make it perfect and your wife is
cool with that framing yeah because she
knows that that's what God wants us to
do she you know we believe that this is
what God wants us to do God puts people
together and then puts a lot in our
hands we have free will and we have to
you know part of making Cosmic
love-based progress is the things that
we do in our relationship this is the
way that we work out the stuff of love
in life is is not it's all perfect then
you're in heaven automatically well
boring that's boring no no no progress
man and you got to make prog one of the
ways you make progress is the imperfect
that you make as perfect as you can
using your imperfect tools and that's
the that's the exciting Adventure that
is a a romantic relationship and if and
if you start off with the idea there's
always something better because of
magical thinking and I'm going to find
the perfect one if I keep swiping right
or left or whatever it is what is it
left or right I don't know I've never
used them that's right cuz we you and I
have been married men for a long time
that that I'm 21 you're how many years
32 man it's impressive 32 yeah
congratulations I am in awe of that my
wife's like it's like 10 minutes
underwater that's good I know it's like
being married to an oldtime comedian
from the cat skills it's nice except
she's Spanish yeah Spanish Jackie Mason
anyway it's a good reference that no one
in the audience got but that's okay
Google them anyway so he's probably on
YouTube yeah uh black and white maybe
yeah yes Jesus that's number one the
second reason however is that is that it
and again I'm not down on dating apps
I'm just not I'm not down I'm not down
with how people use them typically use
them feels like you're caveat I am
caveat for sure because there's nothing
that's good or bad but that thinking
makes it so exactly right and so the big
thinking error in apps is finding
somebody who's who's completely
compatible with us the technology
enables compatibility the the technology
is enables you to find comp people who
are more and more and more compatible
that you couldn't on the on the human
market and so that matchmakers your
parents wouldn't find for you or
certainly blind dates or somebody you
meet in a bar you you just you know it's
a crapshoot for compatibility which is
actually what you need we're too
compatible this is something that most
people don't understand that sounds
crazy yeah I know and so it but but
people will sort on their political
views and their likes and their dislikes
and you know physical characteristics
what you find is that people that match
up on compatibility ex you know um ex
Ane a priori and dating Market they even
look alike right and and and that's a
problem you know it's basically you wind
up looking for somebody who's
effectively your sibling which as my
adult kids say is not hot that's not hot
not hot not hot and so when people are
looking for excess compatibility they
like the person less they find them less
attractive what you need is a base of
compatibility which is lower than you
think and then tons of complimentarity
which is interesting and sexy okay you
want difference yes agreed and oppos
opposites don't attract where do you
want you're now confusing me where do
you want things to be where do you want
to be compatible you need Basics on
non-negotiable values preach right no
non-negotiable values negotiable values
doesn't matter people think that too
many values are non-negotiable that are
actually negotiable politics shouldn't
be in there you should not sort on
politics now 71% of political liberals
say they won't date a conservative 41%
conservatives say they won't date a
liberal which just shows that
conservatives have lower standards
politically than liberals and or maybe
it's men versus women or something like
that I know I got to look into the data
more but the whole point is that that
that's a that's that's a ridiculous
barrier that's a ridiculous barrier that
just that's basically like classifying
being a Democrat or Republican like
being Jewish or Catholic or atheist it's
interesting man like this is one area
where I'm with you in the abstract but
political stuff's gotten so weird people
are so vout about it that that isn't
interesting and the moment I don't want
to be like even even I try not to be
dogmatic but even if I were I'm not
being dogmatic if they're dogmatic like
that's not interesting to me yeah I get
it and one of the best ways actually is
what what I recommend to my students for
example is that they don't talk at all
about politics for four dates to see if
yeah yeah to
have we get into that thing exactly
right so you don't actually so the Dogma
or something and if you can start to
fall in love suddenly you're less
dogmatic yeah you're less dogmatic about
politics and the person you're falling
in love with when they say something
that you would have previously thought
was a non-starter was a deal breaker it
no longer is are you and your wife
politically aligned kind of now just
because we've been together for so long
but you weren't in the beginning no she
was Spanish I mean she was brought
up you know a hard red atheist family
you know really really you know it's
like complete socialists you know they
on the losing side of the Spanish Civil
War and they were all atheists she
hadn't been to church since her first
communion and interesting I quietly
assumed that was the first thing you
guys bonded over ReliOn oh no way that
was just like that was a 10year project
for me wow totally 10year project for me
was but you know she when I met her
she's like no I don't believe in
marriage that's an Antiquated
institution doesn't make sense we'll see
we'll see I mean and I moved to
Barcelona to try to convince her to
marry me how long were you guys together
before you got married uh it well I
hoped that it would be very short but it
took me two years to close the deal okay
from Meet to married no from from moving
to marriage okay how long from Meet to
marry three so we were apart for a year
and I was you know right and she didn't
speak any English I didn't speak any
Spanish or calan and and so I thought
I'm going to the only I had a
premonition I mean I I met her for a
week and I told my dad I think I think
I'm going to marry this girl who he's
like can't wait to meet her I got some
problems she doesn't uh speak English
she doesn't live in the United States
and she doesn't believe in marriage but
I think I think it's surmountable other
than that yeah and uh and so you know we
kind of stayed in touch for a year and
then I I quit my job and I moved to
Barcelona took a job in the Barcelona
Symphony because I had this I had this
very strong sense and by the way maybe
it didn't work out it was an
entrepreneurial thing to do and I was 24
and it was okay and I worked on it and
worked on it learned the language um and
we were in love
and when I was 26 and I said we have to
get married you have to marry me she
saides and you know and then little by
little by and you come together see the
couples change people change over the
course of their lives for sure and
couples change together and the couples
that don't do well change apart because
don't change together there's too much
pride is what comes from it so what'll
happen is tons of difference at the very
beginning lots of love glue glues you
together and then you start to change
together the the ultimate goal by the
way for a marriage relationship that
lasts tons of passion we talked about
the neurochemical Cascade of Falling in
Love of you know love addiction but
within five years what you need to be
left with is what we call companionate
love your goal within five years to be
is to be best friends with a person
that's your goal there's lots of passion
in companion at love that also sounds
not hot you know here's my companion Mrs
Brooks you know no companion at love is
this is the person that you'll be
looking into her eyes on your dying day
and that who knows all your secrets with
whom you can be truly yourself who
really has your best interests at heart
that's what companion at love is and not
every relationship can get to that but
that's the go what do you think that
what's the importance of keeping sex
alive so because that's the that's the a
a physical bond that is the most
intimate understanding of the of your
relationships it's an expression of your
greatest intimacy it's also it's also
super fun yeah A and B yeah I want but
you can have sex with people you're not
in love with you know people do that all
the time too Carfax it's way way way
more satisfying when it's in the
expression of your greatest intimacy
that's why the happiest people have one
sexual partner in a in a given year it
doesn't mean one in your whole life
interesting means one there's actually
been a study on that a study on that
using the General Social Survey
University of Chicago yep is that to me
that just sounds like a proxy for
committed relationship yeah it it is and
and the greatest expression of the deep
deep deep intimacy and commitment is is
usually sex because when people ask Lisa
and I like what's the secret to a long
marriage we always say like one of our
top things obviously communicate but
have a lot of sex like you don't want to
become roommates right and there is
something also and I don't know what you
think about this but there's something
about there's a an electricity to
Crossing that line and there's one
person that you cross that line with and
not having that like one for that just
entire part of your life to die and for
you to never have that thing H that
there's tons of oxytocin that happens
during sexual activity you don't get
otherwise as well and that bonds you
together again and again look there are
other ways to get it too by the way so
sex is not the only way people often ask
is it bad that couples fight and the
answer is it's bad when they don't and I
mean some people fight a lot some people
fight a little my wife and I fight a lot
we fight a lot we have a lot of
arguments a lot Spanish because yeah me
it's for them it's just a form of
communication you know and there's
nothing that's not on the surface and
and so that was hard the first five to
10 years I was very agreed you're not
built like that I'm American you know we
didn't do that growing up in the Pacific
Northwest did we I mean it was like I
yeah that was not learning to fight well
was a big D toar but the key is about
about that couples that never never
never fight they missing out on some of
the greatest source of of of intimacy
because the friction is there and say
things you that you think that you
weren't saying before interesting I
heard you say this before will you take
a second to say that very clearly the
the idea of of intimacy through fighting
yeah people often say it's so weird you
know after we have a big fight then we
then we make love as if it were once
done that I never do that are you in the
mood for sex after you've been in a
fight well it depends on how the fight
resolves but the point is that a lot of
people do that and the reason is because
they're raw and intimate in their
communication sometimes for the first
time in a long time okay for the first
time in a long time so if you're the
kind of couple that has you're not
seeing each other very much because
you're working really hard and you're on
the road and and you're not talking
about things and a lot of tension is
building up and so and then finally you
have a knockdown drag out fight and
you're saying things that you think that
that that are deeply intimate that are
your deepest feelings that you would
never say at work because you know the
kind of relationship with other people
you know demoralize them you don't have
trust you have enough trust and you say
things that might be they might be
cutting they might be wounding but
they're deeply intimate you have a an
intimate Bond you have a a a spiritual
bond with that other person because of
the intimacy of the communication even
though it was wounding that's really
interesting so I will say this I have
had moments where I was completely
uninterested in sex until we had I would
even necessarily say fight cuz fight
implies that it's like really fiery um
there was one big disagreement that my
wife and I got into and it was really
interesting the when we when I brought
up the thing we happened to be in a
swimming pool and so my wife likes me to
hold her and walk her around the pool
and it ended up being this amazing way
to have this argument because it was
really like hey I've been meaning to say
this thing for a few days now here's how
this thing made me feel like let's
really get into it and we couldn't see
each other's eyes and it made it way
easier to have the conversation so we
were like cheek to cheek but we couldn't
see each other's eyes so there it just
became easier to like get those things
off of our chest it was really wonderful
but I and so I didn't want to have sex
until we had that conversation but it
wasn't like I'm going to run you
upstairs and like I've never had that
response like I don't people are
different for sure but it's important
that you have those relationship moments
and those might be bonding your fights
might be as bonding for you as when done
well are you yeah for sure there's
technique Tech talk to me about so so my
guess is that you're in a 21-year
marriage and you're going to be married
till you die yes you're going to die yes
I mean till death to you part for sure
MH and um so my guess is I could
probably write a script for your fights
based on that and when when something's
not right that the accusation is that we
are having a problem mhm now when you
look at a couple that's tenuous and have
really having trouble and really in
danger it's like you're doing something
and it makes me feel a particular way so
important super important and just
changing the language because language
change has very strong cognitive impact
so if you you want your fights to be
you're going to fight and it's important
that you relate to each other and you're
honest with each other but you want it
to stop actually creating so much brain
damage just change the just change the
the pronouns that's the first thing to
do is to change the pronouns in the
fights don't say I and you start saying
we and us we and us we have we have to
do this thing I mean when whenever we do
this thing we have a problem and and
you'll find your stumbling across it at
the very beginning you'll find because
it's because and you did this we have
this problem we have this breakdown in
communication because then you're trying
to solve a problem together and it's a
joint problem you're trying to solve and
when you solve it you've made progress
together as opposed to I won and you
lost it's really super important and
just using different pronouns starts it
can actually repair a multitude of
problems in Rel wife and I do and this
has been really powerful for us is we
talk in insecurities when we get into an
argument yeah so if one of us is getting
angry it's like we have a shared
understanding if you're angry it's
because your insecurity has been tripped
so confess like what's the insecurity
what's the thing that's bothering you so
that you can get off of the surface
level argument which is usually very
and you can get down into stupid it's
like you finished the milk or something
stupid you finish the milk without
talking to me and it makes me feel
unseen whatever and once you get down
there like oo whoa why is that making
you feel unseen and also that the person
isn't just I have an insecurity you
triggered it shame on you it's like okay
I have an obligation to work on my
insecurities you have an obligation to
care enough about me that you want to
know but I can't just be like you have
to deal with it I have an insecurity and
you better tread around it forever
you're doing a lot right I can tell you
that and this is one of the reasons that
You' you that you state so openly that
your marriage is the most important
thing in your life it's it's the central
institution of your life I mean like
this goes all bust and and by the way
this is going to go bust it's all going
to go bust yeah right but the one thing
on your deathbed is Lisa I mean here's
the problem one of you is going to die
first yes although if you ask my wife
she really wants us to die
simultaneously yes that would be like
she's like I don't care if I die in a
plane crash as long as you're next to me
and I'm like what what you talking about
why are we both going down like if I
have to die in a plane crash I want you
to be safe on the ground she's like no
way I'd want to be with
you so yeah that she says it out of love
though so it's you actually laugh about
it totally get where like I sure hope
you die in a plane crash with me yeah no
I get it it's a it's but but that's a
you know this is is an issue right
because that you will be separated yeah
the data say that except under the
oddest of circumstan es you'll be
separated y but what typically happens
is really really happy couples except
under conditions of bad luck they tend
to live long time have a long marriage
and one of them dies and then the other
dies it's crazy man uhhuh uhhuh because
you have a joint life you have a joint
life together the Enterprise it's the
the startup it's a your
co-founders the other thing that's
really interesting too is that the a lot
of the relationships that do best are
startups not
mergers that's interesting tell me more
meaning second marriage well I mean
second marriages are sometimes they're
really great but the the marriages that
that have the greatest likelihood of
success they're entered into earlier
when you're both in life startup mode as
opposed to I got my law degree and you
got your PhD and you got your startup
and I got my startup and I think we're
and we have separate bank accounts and
now now let's have a merger startups are
more successful than mergers there's dat
and oh yeah and the worst of course are
hostile takeovers or Acquisitions but
you know wow okay so you can have a
merger that works but you got to go into
it with your eyes open and make it as as
much of a startup as you can make that
was I don't recommend sub bank accounts
I don't recommend it really yeah there's
huge data showing that couples are more
successful when they have joint bank
accounts interesting let me run
something by you so when Lis and I first
got together um we had enough difference
in values that it was I looked at the
things that she spent money on and I
thought they were dumb she looked at the
things I spent money on she thought they
were dumb so what we did was we said
bills are joint but spending is separate
and so we put our money together and
then we each had the exact same amount
to spend yeah and at the time so when we
got married she certainly had more money
than me because I was just absolutely
broken in debt uh but then when we got
married I was the only one with a job
and the one insight and I wish I could
track back to where I got this this but
I was like this cuz this is all
prefunctional internet the internet
existed but nobody was really using it
for much um and I said okay look we're
going to come together but the we are in
this together so whatever money I earn
it really is half yours right and so
we're going to take care of all the
bills together we'll have the separate
spending accounts um and really have
looked at everything in that way like
when we started impact Theory um the
lawyers were like who's going to own
51% and I was like what are you talking
about and they said you can't be 50/50
that's the ultimate divorce Nightmare
and so my wife is like you're obviously
going to work more than me like you take
the 51% she's like I don't have any
problem with that whatsoever and I was
like Over My Dead Body I was like I need
you to know to the core of your
existence this company whatever if
something goes wrong with us I have a
problem if we're in a position where I'm
like thank God I have 51% I've already
lost everything so right 50/50 well all
you're saying is impact theory is an
extension of Tom and so therefore my
life is 50/50 with you so axiomatically
impact theory is 5050 nice and really
what I wanted to say was impact theory
is an extension of Tom and Lisa like
this is a thing we are doing together
and even if we weren't I mean I suppose
at that point I wouldn't have thought
about it but like if my wife betrayed me
I'd still give her half my [__] mhm just
be like yeah yeah not only that I don't
know who I would have become had I not
in a startup with her you're not preppy
at all and all you were doing is
avoiding fights by you know having
separate allowances yes it's not the
same thing I mean it's just that's just
that's just prudent yes is the way that
it works out it's like yeah we we're
going to tend to fight over this and and
you know we don't want me to
accidentally had take all the spending
on you know giant chest pieces or you
know or you know Batman statues or
something video games that was video
games whatever the thing happens to be
and so let's let's you know make it so
this we just avoid a fight let's just
simply avoid a fight and that way you
can I can laugh at the way you spend
your money you can laugh at the way I
spend my money instead of feeling a
source of resentment but basically
saying my money your money my account
your account my property your property
that's problematic from the very
beginning because what you're basically
is you're planning for is the
disillusion you're planning for the I
mean it's a
union and you know the Union of this is
to say that we're I mean it's biblically
it's a a man shall leave his parents and
and cleave to his wife it's one flesh I
mean the whole in in religious
Traditions divorce is supposed to be
like cutting off your arm it's supposed
to be that kind of a I mean I get I get
it it happens sometimes I get it I you
know I live in the real world it happens
sometimes but when you're doing it from
a startup you can't you don't really
understand yourself without Lisa like
who's Tom I don't know alone literally
yeah that's the thing now not everybody
can have that you know and I'm not
saying people shouldn't not everybody
can can be held to these standards
because of the the the reality of things
that have happened in their lives and
you know I talked to people who have
been the victims of abuse and and
addiction and criminal behavior and all
of this and and they have a need for
love in their life and they get married
again and they have an established life
and it doesn't have these per per
perfect standards social science gives
you the the ideal circumstances but not
the only circumstances and so here's the
key when the circumstances are not ideal
you have to work consciously with your
eyes open to make them as ideal as you
can so if you've got a merger on your
hands got a merger on your hands good
you can make that work too but make it
as as start upy as you can yeah the
thing I would encourage people is to
understand that they're the reason to
Startup works is for a set of principles
if you understand the principles and can
apply them later in life so be it one of
them is going to be being open to being
changed by the relationship going into
it and knowing we are creating a union
and in doing that like what are the ways
that we have to move and to dance in
this thing in order to make it work and
then a big part of it especially if
you're older is understanding that
selection is 80% of the battle like if
you select poorly you're going to be in
dire circumstances they they are I mean
again without magical thinking without
thinking there is one soulmate so Choose
Wisely that's not way I believe
soulmates I don't believe in love for
Sight I'm just saying that if for
instance you said earlier you have to
grow together as a couple now the amount
of all the things that we talked about
here emotional stability getting that
right knowing how to fight well like I
mean there's just a laundry list of
Happiness things right that if you get
right you will be way primed marriage
knowledge is power and your
relationships and your work in your
spiritual life knowledge is power and
and again it it all goes back to I know
people who you know say yeah we knew
each other for a week and we got married
in Vegas it's like that's Folly yeah
that's just Serendipity that it that's
just doesn't make sense on the other
hand you know when somebody says I say
how long you've been dating that girl
it's like eight years like no yeah no no
um and and you know what's the right
amount of time this is what this is a
question of credential judgment too you
my oldest son met his wife now wife when
he was 24 early
24 they dated for 6 months they were
engaged for 6 months they got married a
year after they started dating their
first child was born N9 months later I
mean that's called the 669 Cadence in
Catholic Life by the way six really
that's a thing that's a thing six months
dating 6 months engaged 9 months till
the first baby I mean it's not it's not
that we recommend this it's just it
worked out really really well because
that was enough time but it wasn't too
much right you know it wasn't the kind
of thing where I don't know why don't we
live together for you know 50 years
before we decide whether or not to get
married that's that's not the right
thing either so you know credential
judgment is is is and it's the same
thing with a startup by the way I don't
know I think I need a little bit more
experience so when I was writing my
dissertation I would see these guys and
you know I was doing my PhD with like I
got to read a couple more books like
write your
dissertation pop the question after
certain point but not on the first date
yeah I didn't have any trouble with that
so for me when I met Lisa I did not
think I was going to get married and
then I was 24 mhm and when we started
dating um probably about 3 months in
something 3 four months in something
like that I realized oh [__] like I'm in
love with her and then I was like okay
well I'm either never getting married or
I'm marrying this woman yeah and so I
proposed that at 8 months and we had
spent some of those eight months apart
so it wasn't even like we were living
together for8 months or anything cuz she
was in England and then I was ready to
get married right away I was like what's
it take to get married about 3 months
and she's like you are having a laugh
she's like no way this is going to take
like a year to plan this wedding so we
ended up being together for about 18
months by the time we got married but uh
good fast good by today's standards
that's fast and and by today's standards
you were young yeah um and again Society
changes in different ways but some of
these some of these principles don't
change I don't know if any of the
principles change that's the thing like
circumstances do but principles don't
yeah so how do you how do people grow
together like what is the key there part
of it is understanding that you have a
you you you are stronger when you are
together and that one of the cues for
you to change is the other person
changing so not PE people who struggle
they think the cue for me to do
something different in my life is I feel
differently about something one of the
cues for you to do something differently
in your your life is that your spouse
starts to think feel differently about
that you have to take on the
characteristics of the other person as
if they were inside you you know so you
find for example that your spouse is on
a spiritual journey starts to find
stirrings of spirituality that's a cue
for you to do that too that's a cue for
you to do that too and to do that
sincerely as well and again people say
well you're losing your individuality
and the whole thing yep that's exactly
right yep yeah you're sublimating the
individuality on these things to have
greater strength in the Union right so
that you can have a greater multiplicity
of experiences across the two of you
greater adventure and excitement across
the two of you is the way that that
works and sometimes it's hard for people
because they feel that they're the the
senior partner in the relationship
doesn't that's not the secret to a
successful marriage now there are social
scientists that have very heterodox
views on this there's a guy named Eli
finle at nor Western um a psychologist
who's written about marriage and he says
that one of the reasons that marriage is
so hard today is because we we expect
too much from it he says you know we
expect your best friend and your your
one and only lover and your business
partner and the person who helps you
raise your kids and the only person to
who who knows your secrets and it's like
it's too much pressure for one
relationship that was distributed across
10 people until about the 19th century
or the 20th Cent and but in the time of
the Romantic Era uh where in when when
romance took on its modern connotations
which is it's everything it's magic it's
a you know it's a it simulates the
relationship with God even some of the
language that we've used in this
conversation that then it took on too
much pressure and he recommends in his
book about this that and in his work and
his his very interesting research that
you you you ease off on the throttle a
little bit that you don't expect your
wife to be your best friend necessarily
he even suggests that some couples do
better when they're not the only
exclusive sexual partner I disagree with
that say well I disagree with that I
don't think that the I don't think the
data support that I mean again as they
say in finance your results May differ
right but they certainly don't in my
case are yours yeah that uh that one I
can't imagine having unshared sexual
experience the only thing that I can
imagine is if yay if you're like sharing
something by all means but when people
go off a just don't see how that works
and I certainly don't see how it works
if you invite another person into the
stable pair bond like I know and there's
actually you as an evolution guy you'll
you really really like this literature
that talks about why it screws up
relationships so there's a guy at
University of Texas that does work on
Jealousy on The evolutionary basis of
jealousy and he had this hypothesis that
men are more jealous of sexual
infidelity and women are more jealous of
emotional infidelity Y and so what he
does is he finds that that that women in
relationships they will forgive their
husbands for sexual Discretions but not
for falling in love with another woman
and a man if if if your wife says I I
mean yeah I had an affair all that but
it was only because I felt like I was
falling in love the sex was terrible
you'll be like I I forgive you yeah yeah
I forgive you it's so asymmetrically
weird and the reason for this from an
evolutionary basis is that males have to
be really Vigilant about making sure
they're not inadvertently raising The
Offspring of another male yeah and women
have to be very Vigilant to make sure
that the provider and defender of the
family doesn't stray and take and defend
and provide for another family and
another another female's Offspring and
so that's why the the jealousy is going
to work in that particular way but no
matter what I'm telling you if you have
if you have an open
marriage somebody's going to fall in
love you know and and there's all kinds
of stuff that can that can go wrong on
that so that's not I mean again it's
like different social scientists
disagree on that but I think my reading
of the data and my Prudential judgment
not just my Catholicism suggest that's
not a wise course of action for most I'm
a big believer I I think you're right
about that I'm a big believer in what I
call frame of reference so your frame of
reference or your set of beliefs and
your values right there's other things
that the fringes but that's the core of
it and it will make all the difference
it's not what happens it's how you
perceive what happens just going back to
Victor Victor Frankle
So to that point you said guys have to
be really hyper prototec that they're
not raising somebody else's kid but you
adopted a kid right and so that to me
speaks to frame of reference so and I've
heard you say that you have every bit of
love for your adopted daughter that you
have for your biological kids which I
have no reason to believe is not true so
what did you do to your frame of
reference in order to be able to welcome
her and even though we would both agree
that from an evolutionary standpoint
that doesn't make sense yeah it well
yeah from an evolutionary standpoint it
actually might make sense from
evolutionary standpoint because if you
if there's an orphan even in nature will
be adopted by by non-human mammals will
adopt orphans as their own and sometimes
it will be even a mistake so you see a
the the cuckoo bird will actually lay
its eggs in the nest of other birds and
then the egg knock the eggs out of the
nest of the other of the of the birds
the that have the nest and then the
cuckoo will hatch and be taken care of
by the surrogate mother the
unes from yeah exactly right and then of
course the cuckoo is twice the size the
regular bird so it's hilarious because
you know the the
the I know it's the funniest thing so so
there there is some evolutionary basis
for that in the case of not raising
somebody else's Offspring per se but
raising an orphan and bringing the child
into your own family and one of the
things that you find is that the my
experience but also the research shows
that the oxytocin release for an adopted
child is just just as high as it is for
a biological child so you basically know
that this is my child you lay eyes on
that child and it's Fourth of July all
over this Roman candles in your head and
and it is forever and so it's funny
because you don't actually know till you
do it it's all a theory oh yeah no you
know the bond with the adopted child
will be just as much as with the
biological child it's it's it's weird
because intellectually it's a it's a
stronger bond in some ways because it's
this this election this human will on
top of the neurophysiology of of human
connection on top of it it's really
something I have to say it's funny it's
funny but it's just deep deep deep deep
love and for both both both kinds of
kids I've heard you say you were no
longer making progress when you were a
French horn player and that's what made
you want to leave that I'm wondering if
you felt like you were no longer making
progress in the think tank and that's
why you wanted to leave that like is
that the moment where we all go oh
that's my cue now to find that next
assignment that's what we should use as
a cue the natural Cadence of you know
the value that you're creating you don't
very very few people get to create more
and more and more value in one exact
thing over the course of their lives and
we have an economy that accommodates
change so it's really incumbent upon us
to have our antenna eye up and pay
attention to that because we want to be
able to create that value and be open to
the next assignment so yeah I mean my
motives are never pure because you know
I'm just a guy and and but I do have a
process of discernment every
philosophical and religious tradition
has a process of discernment discernment
is when you don't know what to do how
you figure it out this is hard you know
the decision-making process and so I'll
have students are like I don't know
should I do a startup or go work in
Investment Banking or should I marry
this person or not or should I go to law
school or stay at work or or some some
things are even more personal and and
and delicate and difficult but at any
particular time a third of the people
who are watching us are agonizing over a
particular decision so the question is
how do you make these difficult
decisions and every philosophical
tradition has a process on how to make a
decision and here's the key thing that
they all have in common you got to do
the work and to do the work means you
need to think about it it doesn't mean
you need to think about a particular
thing you need to think about that
decision process every day what are you
thinking about so when I have students
that haven't even begun this process
I'll say Okay 15 minutes a day I want
you start by sitting alone at your desk
no music no phone is not there write
lists of things you like you got to
start getting in touch with the things
that are attractive to you because some
people are completely even divorced from
that they have no they're so far away
from being able to discern what they
want to do that they don't even know
what they like and so just starting to
write places I've gone that I really
enjoyed and not because you're deciding
where to go next but just because you're
trying to get that in order in your head
what are the things that are attractive
to me what are the things that I
actually like um I'll tell people that
they have they should to be thinking
about just a process to let the
discernment happen you have to be very
quiet and very concerted in the effort
to do so to walk for an hour before Dawn
every day with no devices and to do that
so people who are really religious I'll
say 15 minutes a day praying about this
to be given the discernment to be given
proper discernment 15 minutes a day on
your knees so and or meditation practice
there's lots of ways to do the
difference between prayer and meditation
is there one well there's lots of forms
of prayer and lots of forms of
meditation so there are a lot of
meditation techniques single point
meditation analytical meditation um uh
meditation of compassion all different
sort of and the mahay Trad are you
trying to make your best case to God or
are you just repeating an idea in your
head like please grant me the
discernment to understand what I should
do in this moment so there are different
ways to do it there are different forms
of Prayer even Christian prayer even
Catholic prayer which is what I engage
in so every night I pray 25 minutes
which called the rosary a
thousand-year-old meditative prayer
before I go to sleep every night and
that's a repeated pray and that it's a
thing that you repeat while you're
meditating on particular Mysteries that
happened in biblical tradition and what
are you doing you're focusing you're
you're seeing your life through the lens
of these great stories and what that
does is helps you understand yourself
better and all kinds of insight Insight
comes to you over the context of do this
process that's a kind of a centering
prayer there other prayers that are
called uh you know mental prayer which
the Buddhists call analytical meditation
the Dal Lama wakes up every morning and
the first two hours are analytical
meditation where he'll just think deeply
about a passage in tibetan Buddhist
scripture he's thinking about it he's
not reading it he's written down a few
lines and he's looking at it and
thinking about it for two hours he gu 88
and he's doing that for the first two
hours of every day that's analytical
meditation that's not just like looking
at a flame or doing Soul cycle or
something that's not he's and that's it
that's all Al meditation incredibly
important mental prayer is the same
thing where you'll read a passage of
scripture whether your scripture is the
the sutas or the New Testament or
whatever your thing is and you read it
and you say and and you say what is this
meaning to me where am I in this how is
this impacting my life two sentences 15
minutes more it's crazy how much Insight
you can actually get from that there's
compassionate meditation or
compassionate prayer where you you bring
into your mind the people that are
giving you struggle and you think about
you visualize good things happening to
them and you ask God or you ask the
cosmos that good things that that
blessings be rained down upon them and
you change the nature of your
orientation toward them the biggest
reason that you have enmity with other
people is because of your enmity toward
them not theirs toward you typically and
you can literally change that and this
is one of the techniques for doing so so
different kinds of prayer and meditation
they have different functions but we
have to use them as such and not just
just be kind of like all right like like
a little kid like God I sure hope I get
an A on that exam can you please help me
get an A on that exam you have to be a
grownup about this stuff and it's super
exciting and it so that's the process of
discernment when you're trying to figure
out what to do is you have to
concentrate on it the the ancient Greeks
called it
sunus um in the Pali Buddhist tradition
in the Mahayana Buddhist tradition it's
called Pana and in this discernment of
spirits and ignation Catholic
spirituality every tradition has it
where you're focused on it focused on it
focused on it for a particular period of
time if you do the work where you're
focused on the decision looking for the
insight for 15 minutes a day for two
months you'll have Clarity that's the
guarantee it's amazing but the reason
that people can't get clarity is because
they don't do the work they don't do the
analysis yeah for sure um okay uh walk
me through the idols what what are the
idols and how do we use them well
instead of being used by them so this is
a tradition that comes from um
neoplatonism so from Plato as best
stated by his great pupil Aristotle and
then translated into the Islamic Jewish
and Christian traditions in the Middle
Ages so avaros who is the you know the
the the Muslim philosopher from from
from southern Spain um uh uh mosha B
mimon mades and Thomas aquinus so these
are the you know St Thomas aquinus these
are the great figures of this and they
really they they translated Aristotle
into saying the Aristotle was the
greatest of all the social scientists I
mean to to I realize I'm cheapening
Aristotle in this way by saying it but
it's it's kind of a conceit that
everybody you love is like Tom you're a
great social scientist that's like the
ultimate compliment from a social
scientist so by the way you're very good
social scientist so kind and he and so
for example aquinus said that there's
four substitutes for God that he he
believed as did avaros and and mades and
all of the the monotheistic religious
leaders that what we ultimately want is
God now atheists watching us or agnostic
disagree with that but we all want
something can you define what that means
then to Define to want God yeah cuz I I
have a feeling even atheists want a
thing to fit that god-shaped hole but
I've never taken the time for myself to
Define what the god-shaped hole is so
I'd love to know yeah so this is the
thing for
example you're looking for something
that's defined by your craving you know
when you're when you're really really
hungry it it proves the existence of
food when you're really really horny it
proves the existence of sexes right and
so when you really really are
seeking the complex Singularity the
source of all Truth The Cosmic Oneness
is proof that it
exists but what is it but what is it
okay so that's what different Traditions
have been trying to expl for the longest
time this is really interesting though
by the way I don't want to just let that
roll pass hunger is the proof that there
is food the desire for sex it's a proof
that there is sex the desire for or it's
evidence that there is sex it's it's not
a proof in the classical sense but it's
evidence that it exists evidence and so
it would be really really really weird
if you had a craving for something and
the object of the craving didn't exist
it doesn't really make sense yeah and so
if you have a craving for the Oneness
Arthur Brooks this is good yeah and this
is by the way this is one of the reasons
that when all of the conversations that
we're having about AI they're all
misguided AI can't give us what we want
it can't because all it does is gives us
complicating engineering solutions for a
Similac for the thing that we're for a
simulation for the thing that we really
really want which is a different species
of problem you know what we really want
is the is the object of all the
complexity of the universe complexity is
simple to understand and impossible to
solve complication is hard to solve but
possible all of the reasons that all
these things that we do in Tech that are
that promise everything and deliver
nothing but loneliness the reason is
because they're comp complicated
solutions to complex needs love is
complex it's very easy to understand and
impossible to figure out your cat is
complex very simple but impossible to
know what it's going to do all the
things we really want in life all of our
deep desires are complex all of our
Solutions are complicated and we're
we're throwing complicated Solutions at
complex problems and we're not getting
happier and so the only way that we can
do this is to take quiet time in
contemplation of the complex that's the
solution now are you going to find it no
no but it's just like happiness you're
not going to find it you're going to
make progress toward it the goal the the
the the the metaphysical goal the
transcendental goal of a spiritual or
philosoph iCal life is the approach to
the complex Oneness to the ultimate
truth that We crave and you got to do
the work stop distracting yourself with
social media stop distracting Yourself
by saying if I make the money then
everything will be okay or if I have the
prestige and this gets us back to the
idols aquinus said that we crave God but
we but God is complex and hard to
understand and has all kinds of Demands
and and winds us up in all sorts of
one-sided conversations and H and so we
take a complicated solution to the
complex problem and things that are kind
of Godlike you know social media is kind
of social life like which is why when
we're lonely we'll binge it but it
doesn't help and the the social media
equivalent for what we want in God
according to aquinus is four-fold money
power pleasure and Honor by which he
meant fame or admiration or Prestige
that's what he said the the four things
and those are the idols and everybody's
got their Idol that when they're not on
their game looking for the cosmic
Oneness despite the fact that they'll
never find it they'll say okay fine I'm
tired I'm going to go do that thing
that's a that's a simulation for it and
it always runs you in the wrong
direction it runs you in the wrong
direction and only when you know what
your idol is can you actually manage
yourself so you say I'm doing that again
I'm doing that again I'm looking for
money again when what I really wanted
was love I'm looking for admiration
again when what I really wanted was
Enlightenment because you didn't want to
do the work for enlightenment so you
went and did the easy thing which was
getting the idol so is is Enlightenment
a standing for God yeah yeah yeah I mean
the whole the whole point is that these
are Enlightenment is
something Enlightenment would
be what Christians or Muslims would call
the beatific Vision which is to lay
finally Lay Your Eyes on the face of God
which is actual truth if you're a
Buddhist it means because you finally
understand you're sitting under the bod
tree and you you finally have this you
finally get it is what it comes to you
know we in the monotheistic traditions
we don't believe you get it on this side
of death Buddhists think that you
actually can achieve it but be that as
it may I mean I don't know I have my
hypothesis but I am I do know that we're
all move we all need to move toward it
we all need to do the work toward it and
getting it getting the AI is not going
to do it anymore than Facebook is do
that you're linking cuz I don't think of
AI as God but I hear a lot of people
talk about that that it will end up
being Godlike so it's interesting if
they really
are looking for that in AI I think what
I'm trying to fill the whole Godlike
hole with it is all I'm saying yeah so I
I will grant you that for anybody doing
that that would be a tremendous mistake
and I'll give you my thesis on what I
think all this is in a second but AI I
think for me anyway it is it is to
finally get answers to the complex which
may be your entire definition of God
that's an that's an exercise in futility
that's interesting I don't know that I
would agree with that so I feel like and
look I don't have uh the data that I
have the back of the following is is
merely physics right as we that's not
bad grow huh well we don't understand
physics simple physics the the reason I
bring that up is because as we strip
layers off that onion it unlocks things
that we couldn't do before right and all
of us have grown up in a world where
einsteinian einsteinian whichever way
you would say that physics already exist
yeah and not realizing that before that
it was Newtonian physics and that the
shift between the two unlocked the
modern world right and you know we think
of him as just sort of this crazy-haired
guy and we forget that so many of the
things that we rely in the modern world
required us to understand that
breakthrough but it isn't the universal
principle yet we haven't gotten there
we've got higs B on which will which
will show which will render Einstein and
physics obsolete in all kinds of ways
fingers crossed so as we begin to unlock
these things and truly understand them
it it really does open up Avenues of um
technology now one has to be careful not
to view technology as a God but if we
can use AI to either augment our own
intelligence or for it to itself be
intelligent now I'm wildly conflicted
about AI let me be
abundantly deploying it as fast as I can
and at the same time I'm terrified uh
but I want those answers have real world
implications that's the moral of my
story yeah yeah yeah for sure absolutely
they do but the point is that they that
Ai and all of these particular tools
they solve a different species of
problem yeah they are not going to
answer the God they're not going to
because they can't and the whole idea is
that there's always this concept that we
could understand everything if we had
sufficient computational horsepower MH
but that's not right because you can't
solve comp complex problems which are
mathematically different than
complicated problems yes give me an
example of so for people that don't know
you did Applied Mathematics for a while
so this is not me asking some random guy
off the street yeah give me an example
of a complex and a complicated problem
yes because in math the only thing I can
think of because I am wildly ignorant I
would like to be abundantly clear but
from my just not knowing math at all
perspective the only only category of
thing in math that I know as being
complex would be something like the uh
Pi so Pi is uh if yosa Bach is correct
better understood as a function rather
than a number because you can never know
the final digit of pi it's a
relationship interesting yeah it's a
relationship but but so I'll give you an
example two is that complex yeah well
it's a good question whether or not it's
complex or I think about it in a
slightly different way so I'll give you
an example that might um that might make
it clearer so a complicated problem is
one that has you know 75 equations and
75 unknowns it's a highly dimensional
mathematical problem that it would just
take tons of computational horsepower to
to to figure out but there is a solution
designing a jet engine um is an
incredibly complicated problem making a
toaster is a complicated problem you
know if you try to do one out in your
garage with you know stuff that's
sitting around your house you'll
probably burn your house down if you try
to make toast with it it's a very
complicated thing to do but once you do
it you can do it over and over and over
again with almost complete accuracy
that's these are comple complicated
problems a complex problem is a football
game a football game is a complicated
problem where I don't care how good your
computer is you're not going to be able
to tell me the outcome because it has
it's complex it's complex it's a I think
I misspoke you said complicated on and
complex ones but complex it's a complex
problem a complex problem is incredibly
simple to understand the outcome you
know the Patriots SC score higher than
the Broncos that's uh you know the
natural order of things that they that
it's just one team has a higher score
than the other and wins very simple
incredibly simple um but it's
unbelievably the permutations are so
vast that you can't you can't simulate
it you can't and you don't think that's
knowable with enough computation it's
not knowable with enough computation but
actually and even if that one turns out
to be that turns out to be not a complex
problem but a complic problem there are
complex problems like the problem of
love the problem of Love is very simple
and yet it's not something that you can
simulate in any real way and some people
will say well you have your AI
girlfriend that's a that's a you've
you've cracked the code of love no you
haven't there's no there's nobody
watching us right now is like yeah AI
girlfriend just is good no no AI
girlfriend a substitute because I can't
get the real thing is what it would come
down to that's the difference between
pornography and and and and sex with
your wife all right when two smart
people who are well-meaning think the
other person is crazy you know they have
different base assumptions so to me that
sounds crazy and the reason is that I
believe we're in a deterministic
universe I'm guessing you do not I don't
universe I believe we're in a stochastic
Universe okay Define stas stochastic
means there's Randomness in the universe
my father was a biostatistician a PhD
biostatistician and he was a devout
Christian I said what gives dad you know
I'm an adolescent what gives and he said
you don't understand he said you know
what Miracles are and and I said what he
said events that are five standard
deviations of away from the mean they're
way out on the tales of the of the of
the curves you know the greatest gift
that God ever gave the world was was a
distribution a random a distribution of
events he believe and I think it's
actually more than plausible I think
it's most likely that the universe is
actually has Randomness in it which
means it cannot be you can't get to a
single point on most of the or any of
the complex problems you can't and so
you can simulate a kind of a version of
a curve fit but you can't actually get
underneath them and simulate them
properly because we have a stochastic
universe and we live with deterministic
brains our brains say that this happens
to this and this happens to this we have
a supercomputer that's good enough we
can figure out all how it all hangs
together and that's the the supposition
behind einsteinian physics or or or
Newtonian physics that these are that
there's a deterministic structure
underneath that we're we're simulating
we're doing the best that we can to put
a model on top it's a map but that's
actually probably not the way that the
Universe works and if that's the case
and if we have a craving for the source
of that then it's some thing some one
some entity that can be the the the
origin of that complexity per se what is
it what is it you know it's like maybe
my model which is yeah I got the Bible
and I got God and I got that whole thing
maybe that's nuts maybe it's nuts but
it's it's a
hypothesis and it says that we can't get
it from the stuff we can't get it from
the stuff you can only get it by looking
for it looking for the true thing and
that's the reason I think that really
great intellectual life requires that we
have both a an intellectual Pursuit and
a spiritual Pursuit and that we need to
undertake these things in parallel I
think that's the only responsible course
of action what's happening when you're
looking for it like I can give you I I
don't know that Buddhists would agree
with this but I think they would uh what
you're getting by looking at it in a
Buddhist or looking for it in a Buddhist
tradition is you're getting out from
under the
illusion of uh perception if that that's
definitely a western look at it uh but
that feels pretty accurate um that's a
good way of explaining it that's a good
way of explaining Buddhist thinking on
it that you're no longer bound by the
Illusions What What In the language that
we're developing here you're no longer
bound by your models you're actually
able to see the road as opposed to
staring at the map all the time it's
like you know when we're looking at we
got our devices and we're looking at the
the GPS if you just stare at the GPS
you're going to crash in your car you're
actually driving on a road in real
physical life but you're more and more
and more divorced from that when you're
stuck with the with the with the models
and those are the illusions that they
would say that you're trying to free
yourself from by actually imbibing some
of the the oxygen in the in real life
around you okay so if that's the buddh
take on it what is the Catholic take on
it the Catholic take on it is very
similar which is that there is
underlying reality but that underlying
reality is not always
apparent and for all sorts of reasons I
me and that the underlying reality is um
made by God and yeah it is the realm of
God and that we're not we just don't
have the capacity or the you know the
preparation to be able to experience now
Plato talked about this he was
pre-christian Plato talked about about
this about the his analogy in of the the
Shadows on the cave wall the closest
that we can get to actually seeing
what's going on is the shadows of what's
going on behind the fire in the cave
wall um the a lot of the the German
philosophers from the 17th and 18th
centuries in 19th centuries would talk
about this too so the schopenhauer for
example Arthur schopenhauer obviously
one of the greatest early 19th century
mid 19th century philosophers would talk
about villa which was you know the sense
of will that the reality exist ists but
we can't see it because we're just not
competent and we're trying to put One
Foot In Front Of Another and so we
create an an edifice that that allows us
to live but we can't actually see the
reality that's the complex reality is
happening behind it all the time what
you think these guys were struggling
with and maybe your from your
perspective the obvious answer is just
God but I don't know if it's just God
that's a word for it they were
struggling for something they had a
craving because here here is the modern
take on that M uh you're in a simulation
right now some people believe you're in
a literal computer simulation and other
people like me I don't necessarily have
evidence that you're in an actual
computer simulation but I do have
evidence that your brain is simulating
reality as a way so that you can grapple
with it because instead of seeing blue
if you just saw the number of photons in
a given wavelength that are reflecting
off that surface and into your eye it's
so complicated so your brain is just
taking this incredibly complex Universe
which by the way for people that don't
know the human uh our ability to
perceive the actual electromagnetic
spectrum is
0.35% yeah so you're like way way less
than half a per tons of dimensionality
doesn't exist there tons of things we
can't see so we we've taken this
gigantic things we can't see yeah for
sure and we boil it down into something
that is just an absolute sliver of the
reality so okay in a modern context I
get it but like what were they coming up
against in whatever 2,000 years ago when
Plato is describing the Shadows on the
cave wall what is he grappling with like
it's as far as I can tell he's he's
getting underneath like realizing oh my
perceptions do not equate to reality and
once you accept that like everything
begins to unwind well it doesn't begin
to unwind it begins to free you to this
understanding that you're that you begin
to see its Illusions you begin to see
that you are living in a world of
Illusion now how is this the the we can
militate against that by saying it's all
of in a simulation and part of the
simulation is that we're simulated the
simulation creates the illusion that
there is something bigger even though
there isn't but that's just explaining
something away so in a philosophical
basis the way I talk about this with my
students I say okay we got three we got
three choices three doors to go through
Monty this is you know for those
that's the the Monty Hall game in
economics is based on let's make a deal
this old game show that was on when I
was a kid right and you get the the the
contestants would have to choose one of
these three doors and then the door
would open up and it would turn out you
either got a car or you got a living
room set or you got a goat yeah or
something like that so there's three
there's basically three choices about
about how you're going to see the the
existence of of an underlying reality
that you can or cannot perceive and you
can or cannot get closer to and make
progress towards
it has to do with the two concepts of
essence and existence We believe We all
believe that we exist I mean you can
relax that by saying it's a simulation
we don't actually exist I don't know but
let's leave that for a moment and let's
just say that we all agree that there's
existence what we don't agree on is the
the nature of essence essence is meaning
so I'm alive and my life has meaning
okay now the the the the traditional
philosophical understanding the platonic
understanding of this the ancient Greek
understanding of this the Christian
Jewish um
Hindu um Muslim for sure understanding
of this is that Essence precedes
existence let's think about that for a
second the meaning of your life existed
before you were born your job is to live
up to that meaning to find that meaning
and live up to that meaning it existed
it's a cosmic thing that's what comes
from the cosmic
Oneness the modern existentialist view
modern philosophy a lot of it would say
that that existence precedes essence
you're born without any meaning you have
to invent meaning the best you can good
luck a sortra like go sit in a French
cafe and smoke filterless cigarettes and
feel depressed as existence precedes
essence now the third the middle way the
most depressing way is the nian way
which is the nihilistic way that says
existence exists in essence doesn't
there is no meaning the only responsible
course of action in a life is to give up
on Essence there is no meaning stop
looking for God stop looking for
enlightenment stop looking for all of it
that C said you couldn't apply meaning
he said there is no meaning there is no
meaning life has no meaning so you can't
apply because the first one is there is
no meaning but you can apply meaning
that there no the first one is that
there is meaning you need to find it and
live up to it the second is that there
is no meaning until you create it and
the last is that there is no meaning got
it and you can keep looking for it and
you can keep trying to create it but
that's
childish Let It Go Let It Go that's
nihilism that's why we call you know
somebody who's nihilistic somebody who
believes that there is no meaning and
nothing matters that's the reason we
call it that in the popular vernacular
so these are the kind of the three
choices that we have to walk through
most for most of all of existence of
humanity it's been door number one which
is that there is Essence and then we
experience existence and the whole point
of life is to figure out and pursue
Essence in responsible and in in a way
that's generative and meaningful and
that's what we're trying to do that's
that's what I think is most compelling I
think that's the most compelling view I
don't I don't know the truth you know
and and by the way when I've talked to
Sam Harris about this he agrees with me
that there's things that we don't see
that there is Essence that we we can
only barely
perceive and and all of the things that
I talk about from Catholicism to the
stochastic nature of the statistical set
of circumstances which we find ourselves
from the science to the religion is my
understanding my best understanding my
fumbling around in the dark and looking
at Shadows on the cave wall for what I'm
trying to do to to find the essence that
will give me meaning give meaning to my
existence that's the point of my life
it's very interesting so uh it goes back
to what are we grappling with here
so uh I'm going to Define my version of
what I think the god-shaped hole is yeah
and I'm going to put it in the context
of the language we've been using here so
CU I come at everything from an
evolutionary lens right and I'm very
much of the good lens by the way thank
you it really helps you understand a lot
it has been very helpful evolutionary
psychology is just the best it's
bizarrely controversial which I will
never understand but uh nonetheless it
has been extremely useful in my life so
I come at it from that so I'm like okay
if we do have this hole and it is um a
yearning and that yearning is evidence
that there is something what what is the
nature of the yearning and what is the
thing that I'm yearning for right and
again using the language of this
conversation um I have a feeling that
humans have a um a very intrinsic
evolutionarily derived desire to kneel
before
something and now the question becomes
okay if you have this push to kneel
before something why what what is the
evolutionary advantage to those that
kneel before the thing and the best
answer that I can come up with is that
you need to get out of the me self and
you need to get into the I self and you
need to create that distance and by
kneeling before something by put making
something bigger than you now one you're
just you are in the habit of living your
life in surface of something Beyond
yourself right
I don't think this is definitely just
ignorance so you will help me here I
don't think that any of the world's
lasting religions would compel you to
serve anything other than ah this will
be interesting I actually don't know the
answer to this question I will be very
shocked if you tell me that any lasting
religion has asked people to serve
anything other than either Humanity
itself or a God that loves
humanity is
there no doubt there are no doubt there
are religions that that but there I
guess but you stipulated to Lasting
religions I don't see how that would be
beneficial cuz what ultimately what I'm
saying is the proxy the god-shaped hole
is actually a desire to serve your
fellow man because that's going to be
the thing that keeps you alive because
you're way better off coming together as
a group evolutionary yes is my gut and
then religion like the specific weather
oral or written tradition is the thing
that allowed humans to come together in
gigantic swaths in
creature
ants in the fible fashion that we can by
ideas right of religion like those just
give you an instant bond and I'm willing
to kill for and die for this thing that
we have in common yeah yeah so it's
um I also have a huge amount of time and
admiration for evolutionary psychology
but it's totally descriptive and it's
not it's it's neither prescriptive nor
deterministic so I don't believe that
the evolutionary psychology of the
things that actually set out our
impulses and imperatives that they that
they prescribe nor proscribe particular
Behavior I think that we have choices
way beyond our Evolution so let me give
an example um we talked about Mother
Nature she has really two goals for you
and all of evolutionary psychology comes
down to survival and and Gene Gene
propagation that's what all of you know
the The evolutionary psychologist and
evolutionary biologist they say all that
the that that any organism exists for is
to survive long enough to pass on his
genes and so it all comes down to that
but virtually everybody believes that we
can short circuit that and make
decisions that go beyond that we can do
all and so people will say okay well you
laid down your life for a stranger but
that was because you had some
evolutionary impulse to behave in an
altruistic way that that dates back to a
time when that would have been better
for your tribe etc etc etc I think that
the better explanation for that is the
animal path versus the Divine path the
animal path is incredibly powerful it's
a it's a wonderful model for
understanding why most things happen and
why we have the impulses that we do but
the most interesting questions are the
Divine path where we actually make
decisions that are that that go beyond
the what our evolutionary Evolution
would suggest is the best path for us
that go beyond the things that we want
to do that that that help us to
understand that there could actually be
something bigger and and this is the
really unique thing about the human
species is that we can make this
election between Divine and animal
Divine and animal and every day is the
election between Divine and animal and
in fact to look for the source of the
complex Oneness in a world of complex
ingenu a comp complicated Ingenuity
that's to choose the Divine path
ultimately the Divine path over the
animal path in the biggest way so not
everybody agrees with me a lot of really
smart people disagree with me and say
all the things that we actually do they
still come back to Evolution even if
they don't look like this is an
evolutionarily Adaptive thing to do it
it sort of is you just need a more
complicated understanding of The
evolutionary impulse I disagree I think
that there's man evolutionary biology it
just puts us on this track and makes us
act in particular ways yeah we got all
these habits the things that we want to
do and then we can decide not to do them
because we want something higher because
we're called to something higher because
we have a a dim perception of something
that's bigger something that's better
that we're drawn toward and that's the
the the Oneness that we're distracted
from when we're basically just sitting
on the animal path and doing money power
pleasure fame money power pleasure Fame
and so instead of getting on our knees
and contemplating the the nature of
Enlightenment we you know scroll
Instagram that's interesting so as
somebody who believes that you can't be
enlightened prior to death um what is is
it about the contemplation of that
knowing you will never be able to
actually understand it what is it about
the contemplation that makes your life
better I presume progress the progress
principle you're getting closer you're
getting closer and why not why would God
want it such that you can't attain
Enlightenment because well according to
Christian yeah theology I so this
becomes a theological question it's
because ultimately is the relationship
the beatific vision is the relationship
with God him him or herself and you know
the way that the Hindus talk about this
by the way is that the transmigration of
the Soul occurs as people are getting
closer and closer to Enlightenment at
which point the soul will be reabsorbed
into the godhead so the idea of the soul
for Hindus is that your soul Tom's soul
is a little chip of God comes down
enters a human being corrupted by
circumstance Etc becomes perfected over
a hundred or a thousand lifetimes and is
reabsorbed into the godhead and the
ultimate goal of to stop samsara the
endless cycle of birth and rebirth is to
be reabsorbed into God is the way that
so their their understanding of this is
actually easier to understand weirdly
than just I got to see God awesome you
know I don't know it's but it's all
basically saying the same thing getting
closer getting closer making progress
this is the goal in life this is the
impulse and how do we do that all kinds
of ways that our lives are generative
and help us do that you know as as silly
as you know doing a podcast starting a
business all these things they help
other people they help us understand
ourselves they make life they they
lessen the burden for our brothers and
sisters in particular ways this is the
reason that it's so profoundly
unsatisfying for you to do something
it's all me me me me me as opposed to
others others others and ultimately you
get the juice of of the of these
generative things of these creative
things that you're doing when it when it
really does lighten the load and and
improve the lives of other people
because that's the process of getting
closer the process of getting closer and
the physical manifestations of the
things that we do every day and it gets
better and we hope and again this is one
Theory my whole religion I might be
completely off Bas I mean I can't say
because I have no data I can only
hypothesize at this point faith is
belief without data is belief without
evidence it's h it's not a set a set of
non-testable hypothesis is what it comes
down to and it's just that the progress
per se is the point of what we're trying
to do on Earth that's what the C
certainly the doy Lama would say about
the you know the from Life To Life
toward Enlightenment that's what the
Hindus would say about the
transmigration of the soul for the
reabsorption of the godhead that's what
Hindus or that's what Buddhist sorry uh
Muslims and Christians would say about
trying to actually go to live in heaven
with God but it's all saying the same
thing fundamentally about the progress
the the progress is the point of
life yeah I don't know why at this point
in my life this has become such a
fascinating question you're right on
schedule by the way yeah no no seriously
because you you throw off Superstition
and you you look for the pure oxygen of
Enlightenment and what looks like you
know Jesus and Santa Claus what's the
difference you know when you're 20 when
you're 50 you're going ah big
difference yeah it's interesting there
is um there's something about the way
that the world is moving so my goal in
life is to in a really prac iCal way
help people um live a
life live a life of fulfillment and I I
never quite know how to put words to it
it fulfillment survives grief and so I'm
trying to um I have thought a lot about
in my own life and have found tremendous
easing of suffering in recognizing what
I call that there is an evolutionary
impulse to get me to do the things that
will uh align myself with having kids
that survive long enough to have kids
right and so while I don't have to do
that literally I have to understand what
the algorithms are that are running in
my mind to make that happen and um the
more I explore this space of like how
one clicks into fulfillment I do find
myself grappling with it as you get
under perception and you really start to
say okay what what is the Bedrock here
um it does become I'll say quasi
religious because I don't find myself
going oh I'm getting closer and closer
to God that isn't what it feels like
from my perspective from my perspective
it feels like there is ground truth and
you can get closer to it and the more
you understand how the illusion is
created the less you are trapped by it
and the less you are trapped by The
Matrix to use a very uh fun word
evocative way of thinking about it it's
one of the most profound movies for the
past 30 years not withstanding the
cinematography it has to do with the it
has to do with the concept
it 100% it for me it is the most useful
metaphor for the human existence and so
once I understand how the Matrix works
then I start seeing it in everything I
start seeing it in um politics which is
not something I thought I would ever
engage with I start seeing it in the
culture War another thing I never
thought I would would engage with but as
I I forget what this is a reference to
this is a a an allusion to something as
I set aside childish things I really
come to realize that you just quoted St
Paul is that what it is that's hilarious
I can't even tell you where from but uh
that you begin to realize oh this is one
problem yeah and once you understand
it's one problem that manifests in all
these weird ways helping people get
deeper on that ladder because helping
people get deeper on that ladder uh
becomes is is very meaningful to me it's
obvious viously also self- serving in
that the deeper on the letter I go the
more grounded I feel the more I feel
resilient to the slings and arrows of
Life the more I feel like facing death
isn't scary um just all the things all
the things Tot but I
am I don't know what to make of the fact
that when I started all of this it was a
lot easier to have conversations about
think like this act like this uh and
then finding people wouldn't do it and
every time I tried to scratch as to okay
where were all my own Hang-Ups that it
it has led to me circling around this
problem of the god-shaped hole over and
over and over it's uh very fascinating
yeah no it is and this
is I me psychologist and sociologists
have found that pattern that it tends to
occur particularly with people who are
who live in their heads people who are
questioners that they start asking
bigger and deeper questions and the
answers that typically come to them even
with a with the with the greatest
horsepower that the world can provide
doesn't give them the truth that they
seek it just doesn't give you full
flavor it doesn't give you you get lots
of interesting Solutions like yeah I I
got a good morning routine you know it's
really good ice bath you know workout
whatever happens it's just not good but
it's not the thing that I'm seeking you
keep finding answers to questions that
you weren't asking and you're not
finding the solutions to the questions
that you really were asking that are in
coate you know you don't even know quite
how to put words to these questions
because the complex is so hard to
apprehend that you don't even you can't
even you don't even know the questions
let alone the answers but that's what
you're grappling toward and that's I
believe that's what humans are grappling
toward that's what aquinus was saying
that we all want the thing but we like
all right I'll take the substitute all
right I'll take the substitute and
people start to freak out about dying if
they've been taking the substitute the
counterfeit money power pleasure Fame
their whole life because they're running
out of time and they haven't made any
progress because they've been you know
eating non-nutritious
food and not getting and they're
starving to death and and it's just they
get people get into a panic in their
life and they realize they get into this
deep
existential dread this onwe that comes
from you know the depression of the
world that comes because there aren't
any answers and maybe n was right and
and they were just looking in the wrong
place
so that's what I see I I'm I'm I'm
endlessly interested and enthusiastic
about the about the promise of AI but
I'm not kidding myself for a second to
think that it's going to answer the real
questions that I have and that real
people have and the Really the real
things that people want it's funny
because you know the one thing that we
really all want we don't have the
technology for and we're not getting
closer to it you know the the the
happiness that everybody really wants
it's not sold on the Internet it's not
provided by the government you know
we've got lunar Landers and Tik Tok
videos and you name it we can invent
anything the Ingenuity is almost
boundless but we're not getting closer
to the thing that we want because the
Ingenuity is being deployed toward
complicated ends as opposed to the
answers to complex problems we're
answering the wrong set of questions is
what it comes down to and that's why you
can find people who have everything in
the world and are still miserable they
they couldn't get it there they couldn't
buy what they wanted in that store it's
the way that it works interesting that
Dolly llama and I had a conversation
about this because he and I worked
together in various projects for the
last 11 years wow and we had this
conversation about he says you know he's
musing this one point when the doll Lama
Muses you listen it's like it's funny
because you know that you you westerners
you know you've done everything to
create economic value and tremendous
businesses and incredible wealth and
it's so wonderful to give people all
this opportunity so they don't starve to
death death and you know the world is
richer and all that but but you spent no
time actually trying to understand the
nature of what really matters the most
he says we're poorer yeah our societies
are poorer in the East but we spent all
our time and all our Ingenuity trying to
get the source of pure
truth did they make any more progress
than we did I'm not sure but also it's
interesting because a lot of Buddhists
will look at Christianity and they'll be
like yeah yeah we used to believe that
4,000 years ago that's a that's a a
rudimentary theological
technology you're on the right road but
you're way way back compared to where we
were yeah we used to have a guy yeah we
used to have a guy you know and the
whole thing as opposed to these are
different religions trying to get the
same ideas in different ways they think
there's a natural progression of
Enlightenment that happens to people and
societies and we're thousands of years
behind where they are despite the
despite the fact that we're hundreds of
years ahead economically or thousands of
years behind in terms of spiritual
enlightenment complex versus complicated
same idea I don't know if it's
true that is the question uhhuh all
right let's reground this for a second
so this has gotten pretty heavy man i'
I've never had a conversation like this
before yeah this is uh in in media this
is amazing oh thank you yeah um assuming
that the audience is still with us let's
uh let's reground this so in the book
you talk about um what it is exactly
that people need to um come back
together so you talk about the four
pillars to build the life you want right
um what are those four pillars and if I
can contextualize this why does modern
technology seem to move us in the exact
opposite direction yeah so what we want
is love that's what we want um and and
and once again the world gives us
complicated things we want complex
things love is complex how do you get
love love of the Divine or love of you
know truth love of your family love with
friendship the the point of intersection
between family and friendship is
romantic love so that crosses both those
categories and love of everybody is
instantiated in the way you earn your
daily bread which is work so the way
that we needed the portfolio the pillars
or the Investment Portfolio for
happiness that we all need is to spend
every day thinking about the way that
we're going to make progress in our
faith or philosophy whether it's
religious or not life friendship real
friends not deal friends you know and in
the modern world gives us lots of deal
friends but not very many real friends
which are you know real friends deal
friends are are useful to us real
friends are
useless that's and that's why we don't
spend a lot of time on them and then
work that serves is what it comes down
to so those are the silos those are the
deposits those are the accounts that we
need to put investment in every single
day and if we don't we're going to be
we're going to be missing things we're
we're going to we're not going to be as
happy as we could be and we're not going
to be building a stable and steady um
happiness that will that will improve
our lives and help us make progress as
we go through life so those are the four
things it's just a very practical matter
um I set people on I can actually set up
a course of action most people watching
us
are very good at working nobody's
watching impact Theory who's a total
slacker it's like yeah I don't think I'm
just going to sit around all day but I'm
watch impact Theory no you want to be
better at what you do so everybody
watching has got his work is pretty on
point and okay and it's creating value
and it's cool stuff generally speaking
it's going to be cool stuff you're you
know you've got a cool stuff audience
good but are you working on your
philosophical life are you reading the
stoics are you walking in nature without
devices are you studying the work of yan
Sebastian Bach are you engaged in
meditation practice are you practicing
the religion of your youth you need to
do something like that every day I I
recommend at least 15 minutes of wisdom
reading every day stuff you don't need
to read but you your soul needs it 15
minutes a day and I have a whole you
know list of books that I recomend TOS
out a couple well toss out a couple um
depending on what what what tradition
you want to start in you know somebody
who is interested in all eastern and
western and very questioning and open to
all different IDE I would I would
recommend the way of a pilgrim which is
written by an anonymous Russian Orthodox
monk in the 19th century way of a the
way of a pilgrim and what he is he's
just walking around Russia having
Adventures saying one prayer over and
over and over again it's a meditative
book you're reading it it's just like
the more you read it turns into a page
Turner it's the most boring book ever
and turns into a page Turner Zen In The
Art of archery which actually explains
Zen through the activity of archery
Through The Eyes of a Westerner so
that's a very good way to begin to
understand Zen thinking Zen is the most
I self thing ever because it's nothing
more than than an attitude of
observation that's what Zen really is
it's a stripped thing compared to
Tibetan Buddhism all the Buddhists are
going to you know put in the comment
section how crazy and wrong and
wrongheaded I am on that um I would
recommend the miracle of mindfulness by
tick notan which talks about what is
mindfulness it's being alive right now
and how you can actually do that and
there's countless numbers of these
things and there's any number that we
could if you want if you want fiction
that falls into this category is doki's
brothers karamazov that is the most most
spiritual and intellectually
psychologically Rich book I've ever read
DVI is philosophy right so it's kind of
like people were reading Atlas Shrugged
because they wanted they wanted
objectivist philosophy in the form of a
novel if you
want the essence of the search for the
complex Oneness in the force of in the
form of a novel Brothers Kaza by by
Fodor do GES great so there the reading
second thing is family life again we
talked about that before there's one
reason to have Schism in your family
that's abuse everything else requires
work the big reason that people drift
away from their families is because
they're just just lazy they're just lazy
they just like I got to call Mom I was
last time I saw mom do the work it takes
two to tango like if the person is just
not investing like you're you're trying
to engage with your mom and oh my God
yeah I know but the the point is that
generally speaking it's an iterative
process for you don't and she doesn't
and you don't and she doesn't and you
don't and she doesn't it's got to get
restarted and doing the work actually
though even the one even even unilateral
work even one-sided work is incredibly
enriching for your happiness because the
part about relationships that's best is
the giving is not the getting it's
better if you're giving and getting I
get it I mean there's an equation it's a
dynamic situation but even if you don't
it's better to do it than not to do it
friendship is critically important real
friends not deal friends and that means
the work that you have to do is not
pecuniary I have people I work with who
are real friends but they started as
real friends and we just look for an
excuse to spend more time together and
that's how they became deal friends too
but the whole point is you know the
people that you grew up with often
people went they went to college with if
they went to college and you know I have
a son in the military and his buddies in
the military they're his real friends I
mean they've literally saved his life
and and he can't lose touch with those
people I guess that's the ultimate deal
deal right in Saving in saving your life
and then and then last but not least
making sure that your work serves others
and you earn your
success and that you're working to make
sure if you're an entrepreneur or a CEO
like you and me that you're the people
who work for you can earn their success
and serve others because they deserve to
earn the success and serve others and
that's in the hands of the boss to a
very large extent that's the that's the
portfolio and are you either you're
doing those things every day or you're
not either you did your reading and
called called Mom and your best friend
or you didn't right and every day that
you don't you're just you're you're
you're weakening the pillars of your
happiness you're you're getting you're
getting less competent in the serious
business of building your life check out
my intense conversation with Patrick B
David about masculinity to truly be free
you have to be strong enough to control
your own life and many men today simply
do not qualify many of you have been
told the pursuit of power is disgusting
you shouldn't do it many of you don't
even have a clear definition of what it
means